
    the project gutenberg ebook of murder in the maze
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever  you may copy it  give it away or re use it under the terms 
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online 
at www gutenberg org  if you are not located in the united states  
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located 
before using this ebook 



    
        title  murder in the mazej  j  connington
        
        author  j  j  connington

        
        release date  august 6  2023  ebook #71351 
        language  english
        original publication  harmondsworth  penguin books  1927
        credits  brian raiter
    
        
                start of the project gutenberg ebook murder in the maze    
        

murder in the maze

by j  j  connington



contents

    i  the hackleton case
   ii  the affair in the maze
  iii  the immediate results
   iv  the chief constable
    v  the evidence in the case
   vi  the toxicologist
  vii  the pot of curare
 viii  opportunity  method  and motive
   ix  the burglary at whistlefield
    x  the third attack in the maze
   xi  the squire’s theories
  xii  the fourth attack
 xiii  the dart
  xiv  the forged cheque
   xv  the secretary’s affairs
  xvi  the last attack in the maze
 xvii  the siege of the maze
xviii  the truth of the matter



chapter i 

the hackleton case

neville shandon stood at the window of his brother’s study gazing
contentedly out over the whistlefield grounds  this was a good place
to recuperate in  he reflected  especially when one could only snatch
a couple of days at a time from the grinding pressure of a barrister’s
practice  his eye travelled slowly over the prospect of greenery which
lay before him  lawn beyond lawn  down to where a glint of silver
showed where the river cut across the estate  beyond that came the
stretches of the low meadows  intersected here and there by the darker
green of the hedges  then the long curve of the main road  and at
last  closing the horizon  the gentle slope of longshoot hill
surmounted by its church spire  a bee hummed lazily at the open
window  then  startled by a movement  it shot away  the note of its
wings growing higher and fainter as it receded in the sunlight  the
king’s counsel let his attention wander for a moment to the rooks
sailing  in their effortless flight around the tree crests by the
river  then  with something more than apparent reluctance  he turned
away from the landscape 

“you did pretty well when you bought whistlefield  roger ” he
commented as he moved back into the room  “it’s as restful a place as
i know  if it weren’t that i can get down here from time to time  i’d
be hard put to it to keep fit for my work  think of the law courts on
a day like this! and that hackleton case has been a bit of a strain  a
bigger business than usual ”

his twin brother nodded a general assent  but made no audible reply 
there was more than the normal family resemblance between the two men 
in height and build they were much alike  both were grey haired and
clean shaven  and even the hard lines at the corners of the
barrister’s mouth found their counterparts in the deeply chiselled
curves which made roger shandon’s face a slightly forbidding one 
whether deliberately or not  the twins accentuated their physical
resemblance by a similarity in their dress 

“we have the same tailor ” roger once explained  “when i go to him  i
say  ‘make me a suit like my brother’s last one ’ i believe neville
says the same  the fellow has our measurements  so there’s no more
needed on that visit  neville and i have much the same taste in
shades  so it generally comes out all right ”

the likeness between the twins went even deeper than the surface  both
owed their success in life to a certain hardness of character coupled
with an abundance of energy  neville  going to the bar  had made
himself feared from the first as a brutal and domineering
cross examiner  and his criminal practice had done little to soften
his professional manners  roger’s rise to prosperity had been more
mysterious  it was vaguely known that he had made money in south
africa and south america  but the exact methods which had led to his
fortune were never discussed by him  he had come home at the age of
forty five to find his brother one of the leading lights of the bar 
the purchase of the little whistlefield estate had followed  and roger
had apparently been content to settle down in the countryside and make
a clean break with the interests of his past 

the third brother  ernest  seemed hardly to belong to the same family
as the twins  though five years younger  he had none of the vitality
and energy which were so manifest in his elders  and the contrast was
accentuated by the weakness of his eyes  which gazed incuriously at
the world from behind the concave lenses of his pince nez  left to
fend for himself by the time he was twenty  and with a couple of
hundred a year of his own  he had simply vegetated without even
attempting to go into any business  and when his brothers had made
their fortunes  he had slipped into the role of parasite without a
thought  had transferred himself to whistlefield  and had continued to
live there ever since  roger had fallen into the habit of giving him a
fluctuating allowance  which he eked out as best he could by betting
on a small scale 

“what’s this hackleton case that you were talking about?” he inquired
with a certain dull interest 

neville looked at his brother with an expression half quizzical and
half contemptuous  for days the hackleton case had extended in sordid
detail over a good many columns of most daily newspapers  for its
intricacy had been enlivened by frequent dramatic interchanges between
witnesses and counsel  it had shown neville shandon at his best 
relentlessly driving the defendants into one damaging admission after
another 

“do you never read newspapers  ernest?” the barrister demanded  quite
unnettled by his brother’s ignorance of one of the greatest cases in
which he himself had taken a leading part  ernest’s interests were
limited  as neville knew  and it was useless to expect him to go
outside his normal range merely from family concern  wide ranging
curiosity was the last quality one could expect from him 

ernest blinked  took off his glasses and cleaned them  then replaced
them carefully before replying 

“no  at least  not all of them  (confound these glasses  they won’t
grip my nose to day  somehow  this is the fifth time they’ve fallen
off ) i often look at the newspapers  neville  i glance through the
sporting news every day  i never read the law column  though  i can’t
understand it  usually  and when i do understand it  it seems so
damned dull  at least  it’s dull to me  so i don’t look at it 
usually ”

the barrister shrugged his shoulders slightly  he was above petty
vanity  and he felt no sting from his brother’s lack of interest in
his work 

“just as well you left the hackleton case alone  then ” he said  “it’s
an infernal tangle  it’s taken me months of work to see my way through
it  and if i happened to break down before it comes to a finish  i
doubt if a junior could take it on with anything like success  but i
think this week will see the end of it ”

roger had listened to the dialogue without moving a muscle  ernest’s
complete incuriosity was no surprise to him  he could almost have
predicted it  the youngest brother had never had the slightest
interest in anything which did not touch himself  family triumphs
meant nothing to him  except that indirectly they contributed to his
welfare 

the barrister moved again to the window and looked out over the
landscape  a cloud of rooks caught his eye  sailing together and then
breaking up into a mass of wheeling individuals 

“after this sort of thing  the very thought of the air in the law
courts makes one sick ” he said at last 

“hackleton’s coming up for the rest of your cross examination the day
after to morrow  isn’t he?” roger asked 

“yes  he’s a clever devil—sees a concealed point as well as i do
myself  and generally manages to skate round it more or less  he’s
just scraped through  so far  but i’ll have him yet  it’ll be a bad
business for him if he makes a slip  this civil suit for breach of
contract is only a preliminary canter  if things turn out as i expect 
one single breach in his case  and the public prosecutor will be down
on hackleton instanter  there’s ever so much in the background which
we can’t bring to light in this particular suit  but it would all come
out if the thing were to be transferred to the criminal court  then we
could really get to the bottom of the business ”

“so i gathered  by reading the case  anyone could see that there was a
lot in the background that you couldn’t touch on ”

“once it all comes out  it’ll be the end of hackleton  five years
penal is the least he could look forward to  pleasant prospect for a
man who lives on champagne  he’s an amazing fellow  drinks like a fish
and yet has almost as good a brain as i have ”

“and you think you’ll get him? does he realise that?”

“i expect he does ”

“from all i’ve heard of him he hasn’t much to boast of in the way of
scruples  he started his career by speculations in coffin ships 
didn’t he? i seem to remember some trouble with the insurance
companies in more than one case ”

the barrister nodded 

“constructive murder  simply  but that would be a trifle to hackleton 
he’d do anything for money ”

roger seemed to turn this over in his mind for a moment or two before
he spoke again 

“if he’s as hard a case as all that  i think i’d put on my
considering cap if i were in your shoes  neville  it seems to me that
you’re the weak joint in the harness ”

“i? how do you make that out? i’ve got this case at my finger ends  i
tell you  no one knows it inside out as i do ”

“that’s precisely what i mean  suppose he loosed a gang of roughs on
you before this cross examination comes off? a good sand bagging would
put you out of action for just the time necessary to keep you out of
the case  and that’s all he needs  you say yourself that you have all
the strings in your hands  and i don’t suppose you’ve brought every
card out of your sleeve even for the benefit of your junior  it
wouldn’t be like you if you have  you were always one to keep a good
deal in reserve ”

“that’s true enough ” neville conceded with a grim smile  “no one
could handle hackleton in just the way that i shall this week  but i’m
not particularly afraid of sand bags or that sort of thing  no one
could tackle me here  so far as i can see  one can’t do that kind of
business in broad daylight on the whistlefield lawns  and there won’t
be much chance of getting at me on the way up to town or in london
itself  i quite admit the possibility of the thing when one’s dealing
with hackleton  it’s quite on the cards  and because it’s never been
done before  there’s no reason why it shouldn’t be done sometimes  i’m
not nervous  of course  but i’m not likely to run any risks by going
about much after dark until this affair is squared up ”

roger shandon’s face reflected the grimness of his brother’s smile 

“i quite understand what you feel about it  in fact  i’m in much the
same boat myself  that’s what turned my mind to the possibility in
your case ”

the barrister glanced at him keenly 

“some more of your disreputable past cropping up  eh? i don’t care
much for some of your old acquaintances  who’s this fresh one?”

roger grinned shamelessly  his brother knew something of the way in
which he had made his money  for at times it had been useful to roger
to take legal advice without bringing an outsider into problems which
came too near the edge of the law 

“it’s another gentleman with a grievance—from cape town this time ” he
explained  “he  says  he acted as my agent in some i d b  business
when i was out there  he  says  that i got the profit out of it and
that the profit was big enough to split comfortably into two 
according to him  i gave him away to the authorities later on  and he
spent a period of retirement  on the breakwater or some such health
resort  the cure took some years in the sanatorium  and he hated the
treatment  too much open air exercise with plain food  and too many
uniforms about for his taste  that part’s true enough—he’s just out of
gaol  as to the rest  he needn’t expect me to corroborate it on oath ”

“blackmail  i suppose?” asked the barrister  perfunctorily  “i’ll have
a talk with him  if you like  perhaps my persuasive style”—the harsh
lines about his mouth deepened—“would help to convert him to honesty 
it’ll be no trouble ”

roger nodded his thanks 

“i’ll turn you on if necessary  but it’s hardly likely  he seems to me
a vapouring sort of beast  ‘your money or your life’ style of thing 
you know  when i naturally refused point blank to pay him a stiver  he
frothed over at once with threats to do me in  ‘tim costock  the
red handed avenger’—and all that sort of thing  i left him frothing 
he didn’t seem to me the sort of type that would do more than
froth—and he can prove nothing ”

“i don’t suppose he can ” neville agreed  knowing from past experience
that his brother left very little behind him for enemies to pick up 
“well  i want to run over my notes for the hackleton case this
afternoon  where can i find a place where i’ll be free from
interruption? with these youngsters in the house  one can never be
sure of having a room to oneself for half an hour at a time  and even
if one retires to one’s bedroom  somebody’s sure to start a duel with
the piano  i thought piano playing had gone out of fashion  but i’ve
heard it every day since i came here ”

“that’s arthur ” roger shandon interjected  irritably  “no one else
touches the damned thing ”

ernest had apparently been cogitating deeply  he now turned a dull eye
on his elder brother 

“try the maze ” he advised 

“what do you mean by that?” demanded neville  “try the maze? it sounds
like an advertisement for tea or one of these riddles  like  ‘why is a
hen?’”

ernest elaborated his suggestion 

“i mean the maze ” he explained laboriously  “the thing like the one
at hampton court  down by the river  close to the boat house  none of
the visitors is likely to find a way to either of the centres  and
none of us is likely to disturb you  we don’t usually go there  at
least  i don’t myself ”

neville’s face had shown enlightenment at the first sentence 

“oh  our maze  you mean? we were talking about the piano when you
burst in  ernest  and i didn’t quite take the connection  that’s not a
bad notion  as you say  nobody’s likely to bother me if i plant myself
in either of the centres  besides  i want all the fresh air i can get
just now  it’ll be better out there than anywhere inside the house 
right  i’ll go to helen’s bower ”

he moved towards the door as he spoke  but before he reached it a
piano sounded not far off  and the opening bars of sinding’s
 frühlingsrauschen  came to their ears  neville turned back with his
hand on the door handle 

“by the way  roger  what about that young nephew of ours? he seems all
right—a bit moody  perhaps  but nothing out of the common  what does
the doctor say?”

roger’s face clouded 

“arthur? he’s a young pest  about thrice a week he takes a fancy to
the piano  and then he spends the whole day playing one piece over and
over again  like an automatic machine—except for the mistakes 
damnable  you don’t know how i hate the sound of the  spring song  and
 frühlingsrauschen   you must have heard him at it this morning  and
now he’s starting all over again ”

the barrister nodded 

“yes  but what about his general tone?” he asked  “has he got over the
encephalitis completely? did the harley street man find anything
permanently wrong?”

roger’s face betrayed little satisfaction 

“oh  the specialist looked devilish wise the last time he examined
him  but that was about all it amounted to  it seems they know next to
nothing about sleepy sickness  i understood him to say that the brain
cells are all churned up with the inflammation  and the result may be
anything you please  of course arthur was lucky to get off with no
physical damage—his eyesight and hearing and all that are quite all
right  but it seems one can never tell what changes may have taken
place in the brain structure—things that don’t normally show at all 
he may be all right  for all one can tell  or again  he might turn
into a homicidal maniac any day  and then  as like as not  he’d go for
the nearest relation handy  a nice sort of fellow to have in one’s
neighbourhood ”

the barrister evidently considered this prophecy exaggerated 

“he seems quite normal to me ” he said 

“oh  i don’t worry much over him ” roger admitted  “it’s just that
he’s got on my nerves so much that i can hardly see him without
snapping at him  i’ll have to get rid of him  i think  send him on a
sea voyage or something of that sort ”

“perhaps you get on his nerves  just the same way as he gets on
yours ” ernest began in his low voice  “that’s what usually happens 
when one starts it  the other takes it up  usually that’s the way
these things go  i shouldn’t wonder—hullo  sylvia! i didn’t expect you
just yet  not for quite a while  i’m not quite ready ”

a girl in her early twenties had come into the room and now stood
looking at her uncle with a fair pretence of indignation 

sylvia hawkhurst  the sister of the piano playing arthur  had been
left an orphan before she came of age  and as her uncles were her
trustees  she and her brother had been brought to whistlefield by
roger shandon  she liked “to play at house keeping ” as she put it 
and roger soon learned that she could run his small establishment
better than any paid housekeeper  things went like clockwork after she
had taken command  and he soon realised that the secret of her
management was that everyone in the house adored her  one thing she
had set her face against  “we’ll have no men servants  if you please 
uncle  at least  not in the house itself  i don’t mind a chauffeur  of
course  but i know what a girl can do  and i’d prefer to keep within
my limitations  if it’s all the same to you ” her uncle had let her
have her way  and he had never found any reason to complain of the
results 

sylvia’s housekeeping  however  occupied very little of her time  she
hunted in the season  drove her own car  played tennis well and golf
better still  and was reckoned one of the best dancers in the
neighbourhood  most characteristic of all  in spite of her looks  she
was as popular with girls as with men 

as she came into the room  ernest got out of his chair with his usual
deliberation and began a faintly shamefaced apology for his
unpreparedness  but she cut him short in mock irritation 

“he hasn’t even got his boots on!” she complained  “how is it that i
can run everything to time in this house except you? are you  ever  in
time for anything  uncle ernest?”

“i always seem to have so much to do  sylvia  usually  it’s been a
very busy day ”

the corners of sylvia’s mouth quivered a little in spite of her effort
to look indignant 

“very busy! i remember exactly what you did  you played tennis for
precisely thirty five minutes this morning  then you organised a grand
shooting tournament with the air guns and bored everyone stiff with it
except arthur  who happens to be able to beat everyone else  then you
came into the house  and i suppose you looked at the newspapers till
lunch  and since then  you’ve sat and smoked  you must be dog tired 
poor thing  do you think you could wrestle with your boots now  or
shall i have them brought here on a silver salver and give you a hand
with them myself? i’d rather not  so if you can manage by yourself 
i’ll go and bring the car round  put your watch in front of you and
pinch yourself once a minute  then you won’t fall quite asleep  do
hurry up  uncle ” she concluded  more seriously  “i want to get off as
soon as i can ”

“where are you taking him?” asked roger 

“i’m going over to stanningleigh village to do some shopping first of
all  then i’m going to the naylands to ask them to come across and
play tennis  when uncle ernest heard that he begged me to take him
along part of the way and drop him at the east gate  so that he could
walk along the main road to the bridge and have a look at the river ”

“i thought i’d like to see if it was worth fishing  just at present ”
ernest added  in further explanation  “i’ve been thinking about it for
a day or two  but i’ve never found time  somehow  usually  just when i
was starting out something always seemed to come in the way  so
to day  since sylvia was going that way in the car anyhow  i
thought     ”

he broke off  observing sylvia’s indignant eyes fastened upon him 

“boots!” she said  scathingly  and held the door open for him to go
out 

“i’ll be ready in a minute or two ” he assured her hastily as he left
the room 

“men are a wonderful lot  aren’t they?” she said confidentially to her
two remaining uncles  as the door closed  “it seems to me high time
uncle ernest got married  he’s simply incapable of looking after
himself  you two are at least able to cross the street for yourselves 
but uncle ernest really gives me a lot of worry  i think i saw a fresh
wrinkle when i was brushing my hair this morning ”

“i wondered what made you look peculiar at lunch time ” neville
admitted  “now you mention it  i see it on your brow  about as deep as
this ”

he touched one of the deep scored lines running down to the side of
his own mouth 

sylvia laughed 

“you alarm me  uncle  i must have a look at the ravages in a mirror
before i venture out  good bye!”

she hurried out of the room  neville looked at his watch 

“time i was moving ” he said  “i think i’ll take ernest’s advice and
try the maze for seclusion  it’s hardly likely that anyone will bother
to go into it this afternoon  and i can’t stand this piano playing of
arthur’s  it grows irritating  as you say  i’ll go now  but i must get
my notes first ”

a thought seemed to strike roger as the barrister opened the door 

“i think i’ll try the maze myself this afternoon  i feel a bit sleepy 
and it’s quiet in there  i shan’t disturb you  but if it’s all the
same to you  i’ll take helen’s bower myself  i’m used to a chair
there  it suits me  you can go to narcissus’s pool instead  there’s
nothing to pick and choose between them  since they’re both in the
maze ”

“very good ” the barrister agreed  “it’s all the same to me  so long
as no one interrupts me ”

he nodded abruptly and left the room 

when his brother had gone  roger shandon went over to his
writing table and busied himself with some papers  the distant piano
seemed to have become more intrusive now that he was left alone  it
repeated  frühlingsrauschen  with brain wearying persistence and a
reiterated error in one particular chord  roger frowned irritably as
he busied himself with the documents before him  jotting down a note
from time to time on a scribbling block 

“damn that young whelp! i must talk to him about this  one can’t
concentrate one’s attention when half one’s mind’s wondering if he’s
going to make that same slip for the hundred and first time ”

he continued his work for a few minutes  then rose and rang the bell 

“send mr  stenness  if you can find him ” he ordered when the maid
appeared 

in ivor stenness  roger had secured an ideal private secretary 
stenness not only had the efficiency of a machine  but he possessed a
full measure of qualities hardly less important  if his employer was
out of sorts  even the gruffest order failed to ruffle the secretary’s
temper  he was capable of taking just the right amount of
responsibility in emergencies without ever going a hair’s breadth over
the score  and his especial recommendation in roger’s eyes was that he
could keep his mouth shut  he never asked for explanations which might
have been difficult to give  and he never betrayed the slightest
surprise when  as sometimes happened  he opened threatening letters 

“if i ever have a confession of murder to put on paper ” roger used to
say  “stenness will take it down in shorthand  type it out  and get my
signature  without turning a hair  so far as he was concerned  it
would be just a letter ”

stenness’s other qualities were more in demand among the remainder of
the household  he had good natural manners  and he could play games
well enough to make him useful where someone was often needed to make
up a golf foursome or a bridge table  a casual glance at him would
have suggested that he must employ a first class valet  for his
clothes always looked new and he had the knack of carrying them well 

with all this  he was a perfectly safe person to have in a house with
a young girl  he was  somehow  too inhumanly efficient to be
attractive to girls younger than himself  and he showed not the
slightest desire to attract  sylvia treated him as a good friend  but
she had dozens of friends whom she treated in exactly the same
fashion 

“ah  stenness!” roger looked up as the secretary came in  “i’ve gone
over these letters and jotted down some notes  you might get them off
sometime to day  there’s only one of them that needs any explanation 
here it is       ”

neville shandon’s grim face appeared at the door for a moment  in his
hand was a sheaf of papers  seeing his brother engaged with the
secretary  he nodded without saying anything and closed the door
behind him 

roger continued his explanation of the matter in hand while the
secretary took a note or two  as the instructions ended  the whirr of
a car leaving the front of the house attracted roger’s attention and
he crossed the room to look out of the window  sylvia was driving  and
beside her was ernest shandon  they glanced up as they passed under
the study window  and sylvia waved her hand  roger watched the car
swing sharply off the main avenue on its way to the east gate  and
soon it vanished behind a belt of rhododendrons 

“they might have given neville a lift ” roger reflected as he turned
back into the room again  “they’ll be passing the maze on the road to
the east gate ”

the sound of the piano reasserted itself in the comparative silence
which followed the passing of the car  roger made a gesture of
impatience 

“i suppose that’s my nephew playing?” he demanded 

“he was shooting darts at a target in the garden  a short time ago ”
stenness explained  “but i think he came in a few minutes ago ”

“it sounds like him  since he had that attack of sleepy sickness he
always fumbles a bit on his chords—doesn’t seem able to manage his
fingers perfectly  that makes this din all the harder to bear ”

stenness refrained from any comment  roger  after a pause  continued
irritably 

“where are the visitors  stenness? i wish they’d attract him out of
the house  some days he’s all right and one never sees him  other days
he sits and pounds that piano till one’s head rings with it ”

“i noticed miss forrest and mr  torrance going towards the rose garden
a few minutes ago ”

stenness confined himself to answering the direct question and quietly
ignored roger’s exasperation  it was no business of his to intervene
in family squabbles 

“well  that’s all i have for you at present  stenness  as you’re
passing the door  send my nephew to me  will you? i must put a stop to
this nuisance  it’s gone on quite long enough ”

the secretary made a gesture of assent  then gathered up his papers
and left the room  a few seconds later  the piano playing stopped
abruptly in the middle of a bar  and roger’s ear caught the clang of
the keyboard lid being carelessly slammed  after a moment or two  his
nephew entered the study 

in order to give his irritation time to cool down  roger refrained
from speaking immediately  he motioned his nephew to sit down  whilst
he himself pulled out his cigar case and became busy with the
preparations for a smoke  having got his cigar well alight  he turned
round 

“must you hammer that piano for hours at a time  arthur? i hate to
interfere with your simple pleasures  of course  but the infernal din
you make has had quite a long enough run  you’ve played
 frühlingsrauschen  at least two dozen times to day  and that’s just
twenty four times oftener than i want to hear it  you can cut it out
of the bill  after this  in fact  you can leave the piano alone  once
for all  i’m sick of hearing you play  you’re a nuisance to everyone 
raising pandemonium at all hours of the day  find some quieter
amusement  or clear out of the house ”

arthur hawkhurst’s eyebrows rose in mild surprise at his uncle’s
complaint 

“i’d no idea it worried you  uncle ”

“well  drop it ”

“perhaps i have been overdoing  frühlingsrauschen  a bit  i hadn’t
thought of that  somehow i never seem to get through it without a
mistake in one or two chords  and i want to make a clean job of it 
once at least ”

“i’ve got a pair of quite good ears  you needn’t think i missed your
mistakes  they make it more irritating  that’s all ”

arthur hastened to admit his errors 

“well  no more  frühlingsrauschen   then  what about the  barcarolle ?
offenbach’s  i mean  any objection to that?”

“yes  will you be good enough to understand that you’re not to bang on
that piano again ”

“oh  you mean it? i thought it was just your fun  uncle  but i like
the piano  surely you’ll let me use it sometimes ”

“no  i’ve had enough of it ”

“but      ”

roger’s face had been darkening 

“that’s enough! i’ve more important things to talk to you about  what
age are you nowadays? twenty two or twenty three  isn’t it? and you’ve
never done a stroke of work in your life  so far? a pretty record 
isn’t it?”

he paused  and paced over to the window and back again 

“that’s got to stop  i’ve had to support one loafer—your uncle ernest 
but if you imagine that i have a fad for collecting loafers  you’re
mistaken  i’ve got your uncle on my hands permanently  i suppose  but
i don’t propose to increase my stock of parasites for your benefit 
you’ll have to find something to do  i’m not going to let you hang
around whistlefield for ever ”

arthur’s good natured face had darkened in its turn 

“you might increase your stock of politeness without overdoing things 
it seems to me  i’m not altogether a loafer  i’m an invalid ”

roger took no notice of the plea 

“whistlefield isn’t a hospital ”

“or an asylum—i suppose that’s what you mean? you’d better take care 
uncle  there are some things a fellow doesn’t forget  once they’re
said ”

roger’s temper  never very far below the surface  boiled up at his
nephew’s remark 

“that’s enough  arthur  i’ll give you three months more  after that 
you can fend for yourself  you won’t starve  you’ve got enough money
to keep you alive even if the worst comes to the worst  anyhow  i wash
my hands of you ”

arthur hawkhurst’s control was no better than his uncle’s when once
the point had penetrated through the skin 

“a pretty specimen of an uncle! the kind one meets in the ‘babes in
the wood ’ eh? go out into the world and starve  arthur dear  the
little dicky birds will put leaves on you— and i’ll get the money your
mother left you!  that’s the scheme  i suppose  it’s a wonder a thing
like you is allowed to live ”

the flagrant absurdity of the charge checked roger for a moment  after
all  the boy was off his balance  one shouldn’t take him seriously 

“you’re an ass  arthur!” was all he vouchsafed in reply 

but arthur’s disturbed brain had tilted out of its normal equilibrium 
and his rage found vent in a wild threat as he flung himself out of
the room 

“i’ve a good mind to get in first myself  and do for you  before you
can do me any more harm  look out for yourself!”

as the door slammed behind his nephew  roger settled himself back into
his chair  arthur’s outbreak had come as a complete surprise  since
his illness  the boy had given the impression that he merely needed a
firm hand  he had loafed about the house in a condition not far from
melancholia  and at first it had required steady pressure to bring him
to take any interest in normal affairs  gradually he had improved and
had passed over into a state of cheerful irresponsibility  and now 
just as the specialists were taking an optimistic view of the future 
had come this collapse into something which seemed little short of
mania  absolutely without warning 

“i’ll have to get this looked into ” roger reflected  “he’s evidently
not so far on the road to recovery as we thought ”

arthur’s threat had left him completely indifferent  he had almost
forgotten it when he rose again from his chair  in itself it seemed
unimportant  merely some wild words flung out in a brain storm  he
left the house and took the road to the maze 

stenness saw his figure pass into the belt of rhododendrons  and as
soon as it had disappeared  the secretary made his way to roger’s
study  an abc time table was on one of the shelves  and stenness 
taking it down  began to study the times of trains 

“i can’t leave it later than that ” he said to himself at last  “the
next one wouldn’t get me into london in time for the boat train ”

his eye turned to the window and ranged over the lawns 

“well  it’ll be a hard wrench to leave here  no matter what happens 
and i wish i saw to night over and knew where i stand ”

he passed to a fresh line of thought 

“at the worst  nothing will matter much if i don’t pull it off ”

he replaced the abc on its shelf and went up to his own room  first
locking the door  he began deliberately to pack his razors and other
toilette articles in an attaché case  when he had completed this task 
he glanced round the room 

“nothing else? no  all the rest of the stuff is waiting for me in
london ”



chapter ii 

the affair in the maze

howard torrance fidgeted a little and then turned to the girl beside
him 

“a bit feeble  just sitting about like this and doing nothing  care to
go down to the tennis courts and play a single?”

vera forrest knew the symptoms well  a good many men would have been
glad enough of the chance to monopolise her and would have asked
nothing better than to sit there in the shade in her company  but
howard had a surplus of physical energy which could be worked off only
by continual exercise  “what’ll we do next?” was a phrase which ran
through his talk like a reiterated battle cry  and he seemed to have
exalted sloth to the premier position in his private catalogue of the
mortal sins  she glanced at him mischievously and decided to tease him
a little before letting him have his way 

“no  thank you ” she said  sedately 

howard had a second suggestion ready 

“want to go over to the links and play a few holes?”

“no  thanks ”

“what about taking the car to stanningleigh  i need some cigarettes
and i’ll stand you a box of chocolates ”

“no ”

howard looked at her suspiciously 

“is this a new game? ‘no  thank you        no  thanks        no ’
trying to make it shorter each time  is that it? well  you’ve got to
the bottom of the bag this shot  this is where the master brain says
‘checkmate!’ ahem! like to take a boat out on the river for a while?
you can’t say no in less than two letters ”

vera made no audible response  but she shook her head in refusal  her
companion admitted his defeat gracefully 

“didn’t think you’d manage it  you win  will you have a saucepan or a
cheap alarm clock? all the other prizes have been awarded already ”

then  as though dismissing trifles and becoming serious 

“what’s to be done? we can’t sit around like this the whole day 
time’s on the wing  and all that ”

vera looked at the shadows on the grass 

“it’s getting on certainly  we really haven’t time to do much before
tea ”

“it couldn’t miss that  i suppose? it wants its tea?”

“it wants its tea ” vera admitted  gravely 

howard looked at his watch 

“pity we wasted the best part of the afternoon just sitting round and
loafing ” he commented disconsolately 

for a few moments he remained silent  evidently turning various
projects over in his mind 

“tell you what ” he suggested at last  “ever been in the old maze down
there by the boat house? no? neither have i  what about dashing over
and trying our luck with it? part at the entrance  and the first that
gets to the centre wins the game  they say it’s a grand puzzler ”

“well  if it will make you happy  i don’t mind  but wait a moment 
hasn’t the maze got two centres? somebody told me that once ”

howard brushed the objection aside 

“the first one to reach either centre scores a win  if you get there 
sing out  i’ll trust to your native honesty to keep you from
cheating ”

it was comfortable under the trees  and vera attempted to put off the
evil moment of departure even by a few seconds 

“how many entrances has the maze?”

“oh  don’t know  exactly  four or five  i think  nothing in that  take
the first one we come to  whichever it is  then you go to the right
and i’ll go to the left  or t’other way about if you like  and the
best man wins  i’ll risk a box of chocolates or a tin of cocoa on it 
if you insist  come along  don’t let’s decay here any longer  i see a
bit of moss has grown on my toe since we sat down—and no wonder ”

vera gave in and rose from her seat with feigned reluctance 

“bit stiff in the joints with sitting so long?” howard inquired 
sympathetically  “it’ll wear off at once ”

as they sauntered across the stretches of turf which led down to the
maze  vera was struck by the quietness of the grounds 

“whistlefield’s a lovely place  isn’t it  howard?”

“top hole ” he agreed  cordially  “first class tennis courts  good
golf course only a quarter of an hour away  the river’s quite decent
for punting  plenty of room in the house to dance  and i believe they
run a pack of otter hounds somewhere in the neighbourhood ”

“i didn’t know you were a house agent ”

howard saw the dig  but took no offence 

“sounds a bit like their patter  doesn’t it? ‘company’s water  gas 
and electric light  telephone  main drainage ’ well  nothing to be
ashamed of  is it? whistlefield’s all right ”

“sylvia’s lucky to be here  by the way  where has she gone to this
afternoon  do you know? i haven’t seen her since lunch ”

“off in the car to see some people and arrange for some tennis
to morrow  i must say sylvia looks after one well when one comes to
stay  always on the go ”

“where are the rest of the villagers?”

“one uncle’s off with sylvia  the other two were in the study when i
saw them last  stenness is somewhere around  i met young arthur when
you sent me up to the house a few minutes ago  he was coming out of
the gun room with a nasty look in his eye and an air gun in his hand 
gave him a cheery hail and got a grunt in reply  seemed peevish about
something or other  quite fretful  even  wished him good hunting and
asked him if he was going to shoot rabbits in the spinney  all i got
was a growl that he was going to shoot something sitting if he
couldn’t shoot it any other way  seemed determined to work off bad
temper by slaughtering something  no matter what!”

vera’s face betrayed sympathy 

“poor arthur! it’s hard lines on that boy  howard  he’s been changed a
good deal by that beastly illness he had ”

howard’s expression showed that he shared her feelings 

“pity  used to be a bright lad  all right  even yet  but not quite the
same  somehow  moody at times  and apt to loaf about doing nothing for
half the day  no real go in him  a queer temper  too  some days  when
i met him just now  for instance  he looked ready to bite me in the
gizzard  not at all the society man ”

vera dismissed the subject  which threatened to throw a gloom over
them both  they liked arthur hawkhurst  in spite of the occasional
flashes of abnormality which he had shown since the attack of
encephalitis lethargica 

“you’re playing quite fair  aren’t you  howard? you’ve never been
inside the maze at all?”

“you don’t suppose i’d cheat for the sake of winning a tin of cocoa 
do you? it’s amazing what a low view of mankind some girls have 
soured from the cradle  what? and born in suspicion  belike  shake it
off  or it’ll grow on you  vera  go and dig in the garden when you
feel an attack coming on ”

“oh  don’t rub it in! i know your motto well enough  ‘perspiration is
better than cure ’ or something like that  isn’t it? i only asked out
of idle curiosity  no reflections on your honesty really intended ”

“your apology of even date duly received and filed  sounds like the
house agent vein again  that  doesn’t it? come on  i’ll race you this
last hundred yards and give you a start to that rhododendron  half a
tin of cocoa on the event  since you’re so mercenary ”

vera rejected his offer  and they walked over the last lawn to the
nearest entrance to the maze 

the maze at whistlefield was a relic of earlier days when such things
were fashionable  but it had been kept in good repair  and roger
shandon’s gardeners spent a considerable amount of labour in clipping
its topiary hedges into the semblance of green walls  somewhat
irregular in outline  it covered about half an acre of ground  but
into that limited space there was compressed more than half a mile of
pathways  and the shortest route to either of the centres was at least
two hundred and fifty yards in length  but few except experts could
have found their way to either helen’s bower or the pool of narcissus
by walking a mere two hundred and fifty yards  the whistlefield maze
was a labyrinth far exceeding in complexity its kindred at hatfield
and hampton court  its twelve foot hedges were impenetrably thick  and
in its design it followed the “island pattern” to such an extent that
incautious explorers might wander by the hour through its tiny
archipelago without gaining a foot towards the innermost recesses or
even realising that they were simply coasting round and round the
outline of some detached hedge 

so many people had got temporarily lost in the labyrinth and  being so
far away from the house  had been unable to get help even by shouting 
that at last precautions had been taken to avoid mishaps of the kind
in future 

as vera and her companion reached the tall iron gate in the outer
hedge which marked one of the entrances  they found themselves
confronted with a small notice board to which an old fashioned horn
was suspended 

  visitors entering the maze are advised to take this horn with them
  so that they can summon assistance if necessary  on leaving the
  maze  kindly hang the horn in its place again 

howard went up to the board and read the notice with obvious contempt 

“nice lot of incompetents they seem to have about the house!” he
commented in a scathing tone  “i wonder they don’t provide a
bath chair and a man to push you to the centre  and be done with it 
as if any person of ordinary intelligence couldn’t find his way
through a thing about the size of a washing green ”

“ever been in a maze before?” vera inquired 

“no  not that i can remember ”

“ah  then kindly unhook the horn and give it to me  i’m not proud ”

howard took the horn from its place and handed it over 

“what’s the good of one horn  since we’re not going in together?”

vera looked him over coldly 

“when i get lost  i shall blow the horn and get someone to show me the
way out  when you get lost  you’ll be able to practise breathing
exercise in yelling for help  you see  you’ve got a much louder and
harsher voice than i have  you’ll be all right  i’m sure  but if you
think you can’t come up to the lung power needed  you might go round
to the next entrance and see if there isn’t a horn there  i should
think there’s sure to be one at each entrance ”

howard was put on his mettle 

“oh  i shan’t get lost  don’t fret too much about me  now then  who’s
for the centre?”

“come along  then  i’ll take the left hand path here  and you can go
to the right  whoever gets first to the centre can shout ‘i win!’ and
then start for the exit door  if it’s a tie at the centre  then the
first one out is the winner  keep a tight hold on your honesty and
don’t shout unless you get to the centre! these are all the directions
necessary  i think  now  go!”

vera hurried along a straight corridor for some twenty yards and then
turned sharply to the right as the path altered its direction  on
again  until a promontory of hedge forced her to diverge into a recess
in the greenery  from which she emerged again into the main track 
another corner to the right was turned and now she seemed to have come
into a cul de sac 

“rather a sell if i’ve chosen a blind alley at the very start ” she
thought to herself  “howard would jubilate over that when he found out
about it ”

however  on reaching the wall of hedge which seemed to bar her way 
she came upon a concealed turning to the right 

“after walking all that distance  i’m still on the very outer rim of
this maze! however  this turn’s going to take me in towards the
centre ”

up to that point her progress had been simplicity itself  but now
alternative paths began to open up every few yards  the tall hedges
cut off everything but the sky  and soon she found that she had
completely lost her bearings and was wandering at random  for a time
she hurried forward  choosing always those turnings which seemed
likely to bring her nearer to where she supposed the centre to lie 
but at last the continual windings confused her so much that she could
not even tell in which direction to walk in order to reach the inner
reaches of the labyrinth  long zig zag corridors ended  time after
time  in blank walls  and in traversing them forwards and back again
she grew more and more doubtful of her bearings  when she thought of
taking the sun as a reference point  it was too late  for by that time
she had lost all notion of her whereabouts 

“i’m sure i’ve seen that patch of withered leaves in the hedge more
than once before ” she said to herself  halting to examine it more
carefully  “yes  i’m certain i passed it a few minutes ago  i must be
coming back in my tracks and just going over the same ground again and
again ”

with the dying out of her own footfalls  the silence of the maze
impressed itself on her  and she strained her ears to catch the sound
of howard as he moved somewhere beyond these impenetrable green living
walls 

“if i really get stuck in here ” she reflected  “i can always blow the
horn and bring someone who knows the place to lead me out ”

she listened again  more intently  then  suddenly there was no need to
strain her ears 

first came a dull thud  which unconsciously she recognised as
familiar  though she could not identify it at the moment  then  almost
at the same instant  a man’s voice gave an inarticulate cry in which
surprise  pain  and anger seemed to be mingled  a moment of silence 
then a peculiar metallic grating reached her ears  followed by a
second thud and a fresh cry of pain  again came the familiar metallic
rasping  yet another of these familiar dull concussions  and then 
lower this time  a last cry  then there was silence once more 

vera stood paralysed by what she had heard  in a flash of
enlightenment she guessed that behind these inexplicable events some
tragedy was in progress  something dreadful was happening quite close
at hand  though screened from her by the high green walls which shut
her in  she had never heard that note in a man’s voice before  utterly
shocked by the unexpected revelation of violence  she stood for a
moment with her knees trembling under her  while her pulse beat in her
throat so heavily as to prevent her uttering a sound  then  with an
effort  she found her voice 

“howard! are you there? what’s happened? oh  what’s happened?”

“i’m here ”

she could not make out from which direction his shout came  the
towering hedges seemed to deflect sound so that it was impossible to
determine even approximately the position of a speaker 

“what were those cries  howard? what’s happened?”

“i don’t know ” he answered  “somebody hurt  but i can’t get to the
place  stay where you are  vera  i’ll see if i can find my way to
you ”

she listened intently in the silence that followed  feet moved in the
maze  evidently howard was doing his best to make in her direction 
but beyond this she could detect no other noise  though she strained
her ears to the utmost  she had expected to hear groans from the
wounded man  but nothing broke the stillness until howard called to
her again  his voice seemed farther off than before 

“shout  will you  vera? i’ve lost your direction ”

she called again  and he replied  but as she listened  his footsteps
seemed to recede and die away in the distance  evidently he had found
that the direct path was blocked and had had to retreat up some alley
to try a fresh start 

then  with surprise at her previous forgetfulness  she bethought
herself of the horn in her hand  that would bring assistance  she
ought to have remembered it before  the shock had put it out of her
mind  she was in the act of lifting it to her lips when again her
nerves were shaken by a new cry from the inner recesses of the maze 

“murder!”

she recognised howard’s voice  tinged with horror  it was a
loud voiced ejaculation rather than a cry for assistance  she felt
with relief  howard hadn’t run into a trap  before she could pull
herself together  he shouted again  this time with the full strength
of his lungs 

“murder! see that no one gets away from the maze!”

vera’s nerves were almost attuned to the shock of the discovery  a
picture of some swift and terrible act of violence crossed her mind 
it must have been soon over  for she remembered that after the three
cries she had heard no sound of any sort  not twenty yards from her 
it might be  a human being had been battered out of existence  and but
for these cries she would have known nothing whatever 

she raised her voice again 

“howard! i’m frightened  what’s happened?”

“one of the shandons has been killed  i blundered into the centre 
trying to get to you  there’s blood on his coat ”

he broke off for a moment  evidently gathering his breath  then again
he shouted 

“murder! help! here in the maze! murder!”

vera held her breath  listening eagerly for some answering cry from
the outer world which now seemed so peaceful and unattainable  then in
the silence  she heard the sound of a man running hard in the alleys
of the maze 

“is that you  howard?” she called  “i hear someone running not far
from where i am ”

no sooner had she spoken than the noise of running footfalls ceased
abruptly 

“is that you  howard?” she called again  nervously 

there came a sound of rustling and tearing  then howard’s voice
sounded across the labyrinth 

“i’m here  i’m trying to get to you  i tried climbing the hedge  but
it’s no good  what did you say? i didn’t catch it ”

“there’s somebody moving about in the maze  howard  i heard his
footsteps ”

howard torrance’s voice replied with that baffling indeterminateness
in direction which the maze seemed to impart 

“can you hear me  vera?”

“yes ”

“well  don’t utter another sound  don’t use the horn  keep absolutely
quiet and try to make your way out of the maze  if anyone comes round
the corner  yell your head off  but unless you see something  keep
silent and step softly  there’s someone in the maze  and i don’t want
him to know where you are ”

vera leaned against the high hedge for a minute or two  trying to
overcome the panic into which howard’s last words had plunged her  he
had been careful not to put the thing to her nakedly  but she saw what
lay behind his directions  the murderer was still in the maze  and on
his way out he might come upon her  if he did  she would be too
dangerous a witness to leave alive  she need expect no mercy  and what
hope of escape would she have? there  shut in among these towering
walls  isolated from all help in the intricacies of the maze  it would
be an easy business to silence her finally 

she listened intently once more  but no sound came to her ears  the
murderer seemed to have made his way into some remoter part of the
maze  suddenly a clatter at her feet startled her into an agony of
terror  it was the horn which she had allowed to slip from her hand in
the intensity of her concentration upon the sounds about her  she
stooped to pick it up again  then  thinking that it would merely
hamper her  she let it lie where it had fallen 

but at once came the realisation that the sound of its clash upon the
path must have betrayed her position  if the murderer were lurking at
hand  she tried to listen again  but her heart was hammering and the
pulsing of the blood in her ears drowned all external sounds  a lump
seemed to gather in her throat and she felt as though she would choke 
with a physical effort she fought down her difficulties 

“hysteria!” she told herself  “if i give way to it  i’ll be putting
myself straight into the brute’s hands ”

at last the rustle in her ears subsided and she was able to listen
again  for a few instants she heard nothing  then  quite close at
hand  a dry twig cracked as though someone had set his foot on it  the
murderer had not left the maze 

she felt almost unable to stir  but at last she forced herself into
motion  anything was better than staying in the place where the
assassin might have heard her drop the horn  softly she stole down the
corridor  once she had begun to move  all her impulse was to break
into a run  but she fought hard against it 

“if i begin to run  i’m done for ” she thought  “i’d go on running  i
wouldn’t be able to run to a corner  and it’s at the corners i must be
careful  or i may run full tilt into him ”

and then her mind  despite herself  conjured up vivid pictures of that
meeting  she could see a vague figure rising to block her passage 
with an almost physical shrinking she thought of it with a knife in
its hand  the blade dripping with the blood of the earlier victim  it
came over her how safe and peaceful the normal world was—and now  in
pursuit of an aimless piece of amusement  she had come into the
slaughterhouse  the minotaur was afoot in the labyrinth 

at the end of the alley she forced herself to halt and peeped
cautiously round the corner  no one was in sight  so she ventured into
a fresh avenue  then came a fork in the path  and she took the passage
which seemed to offer the longest clear view ahead  then another
corner  and more precautions 

she was moving at random now  all her attention concentrated on
avoiding the unseen assassin  once she heard steps  someone was
walking on the opposite side of the hedge against which she was
crouching  she held her breath  pictured that terrific figure which
she had conjured up  he was stepping lightly like herself  and she
almost feared that he would hear the beating of her heart  so near did
he come  then  when she thought she could bear it no longer  the
footfalls receded softly into the distance 

“if that happens again  i’ll shriek ” she said to herself  “i simply
couldn’t go through it twice ”

two more corners rounded in safety  then in a straight alley a
metallic object glittered at the foot of the hedge and with a sinking
heart she recognised it as the horn she had dropped 

“i’m back again at the same place  i’ll never get out of this trap!”

again she started  stepping as softly as possible  but to her strained
ears the sound of her footsteps seemed to echo and re echo along the
green walled corridors 

“what a fool i am! i ought to have taken off my shoes long ago  then i
could go as quick as i please  without making any noise ”

she slipped off her shoes  and some of her confidence came back when
she found how silently she could move 

“now i must keep things in my head and get off the track i followed
last time ”

at one remembered turning  she took a fresh track and stole along it
with every precaution  again she heard the sound of steps  but they
were farther off this time  and after halting for a few seconds she
felt safe to go on her way once more 

“if i don’t get out soon  i’ll faint ”

but she refused to give in  the thought of lying helpless in one of
these tenantless corridors at the mercy of the hidden murderer  kept
her on her feet 

“he’d think i was shamming  and he’d make sure of me ”

the thought of that fate was just sufficient to nerve her to a
desperate attempt to extricate herself from the labyrinth  but now her
self control gave way  she began to hurry along the interminable
corridors  and before many seconds had passed she had broken into a
run  soon she was flying headlong down the alleys  slipping as she
turned corners in full flight  dashing blindly into hedges which
blocked her path in culs de sac  and striving only to outstrip the
phantom murderer whom she felt at her heels  all thought of caution or
direction had gone to the winds as she fled at haphazard down the
tortuous paths 

just as she felt that she could force herself no farther  a wider gap
than usual appeared in one of the green walls  and she flung herself
into it in the hope that it might be one of the exits  but instead of
the broad lawns of whistlefield  she found before her a tiny open
space shut in on all sides by greenery 

a few garden chairs were scattered about it  under the shade of the
hedges  one of them had been overturned  and beside it lay  face
upwards  the body of a man in grey flannel clothes  vera had never
seen a dead man before  but it needed no second glance to tell her
that she had stumbled upon the victim of the tragedy 

“it’s roger shandon!”

almost subconsciously she noted that the body showed no visible signs
of violence  roger seemed to have collapsed as he rose from his chair 
she could see no pool of blood which might have pointed to the manner
of his death 

vera’s nerves could withstand the strain no longer  the glimpse of the
body proved to be the final touch which was more than she could bear 
almost incuriously she noticed the blue sky darken  turn violet  and
then go black  she retreated a couple of paces  only to go down in a
faint 

when she came to her senses again  it was to hear the sound of her own
name in her ears  but when she looked round she could see no one
standing beside her 

“vera! are you there? why don’t you answer?”

slowly she came back to normal consciousness and the realisation that
it was howard torrance’s voice continually calling 

“vera! answer if you can  what made you shriek like that?”

so she must have uttered some involuntary cry before she fainted  she
turned this over in her mind mechanically  hardly yet knowing where
she was  then all at once things came back to her and she rose to her
knees  roger shandon’s body was close to her  and she turned away her
head so as not to see the dead man 

“vera!”

she pulled herself together and answered with a faint call 

“thank god you’re all right ” she heard howard answer 

“where are you?”

“i’ve come to the centre where the body is  oh  howard  what am i to
do?”

“the murderer’s gone  i think ” came the reply  “can you walk at all?
get away from that place at once  no wonder you shrieked when you came
upon it  if you’ll call as often as you can manage it  i’ll try to
find my way to you ”

with an effort she forced herself to her feet once more  her strength
seemed to be almost gone  but by sheer will power she succeeded in
making her way out of the tiny enclosure into the green corridor 
anything to get away from the sight of the body! it was too grim a
reminder of the perils of the maze 

for a time she leaned against the hedge just outside the centre 
trying to gather up enough energy to launch once more into the
labyrinth  one horror had at least been banished  howard said the
murderer had escaped from the maze  she need have no fear of meeting
that demon in her wanderings  it seemed hours since she and howard had
come so light heartedly into that daedalian web  she had no idea how
long she had been unconscious  and when she looked back  she seemed to
have spent an eternity in the paths of the maze before she had
blundered into the centre 

at last she pulled herself together and called again to howard 

“howard! i’m going to try for the way out now ”

“all right! give me a call occasionally  so that i’ll know you’re all
right  by the way  why don’t you blow the horn?”

“i’ve lost it  i dropped it when i thought the murderer was chasing
me ”

“i wondered why you didn’t use it  after i’d told you he’d cleared
out  shouting’s no good  i’ve been yelling at the pitch of my voice
for long enough  but there’s no one within earshot  evidently ”

vera set off again  the rest had done her good  now that the immediate
terror of the murderer in the maze was removed  she felt a different
person  the horror through which she had passed began somehow to take
on a tinge of unreality  had she actually seen roger shandon’s body
lying on the grass  or had it been a mere hallucination sweeping over
her when she was on the verge of fainting? she had the feeling that
the whole thing might be some walking nightmare which had passed 

and now  by that curious hazard which sometimes happens in mazes  she
hit upon the shortest route to the exit  when she was least expecting
it  a sudden turn in the corridor revealed one of the iron gates in
the outermost hedge 

“howard! i’ve come to the gate  what a relief!”

“wait before you go ” howard’s voice came to her over the intervening
partitions  “listen to me  once you get outside  run to the house  if
you meet anyone on the way  send him down to get me out of this
tangle  i seem to have no luck  when you get to the house  find
stenness or one of the other men  send the lot  if they’re there  tell
them about the murder and tell them to get the police on the ’phone at
once  and get yourself some brandy or something  you’ll need it  poor
thing!”

vera made a careful note of his orders 

“i’ll see to that  i’m going now  howard  good bye ”

she ran out of the iron gate and saw with immense relief the broad
prospect of the lawns before her  out at last! then she hurried off in
the direction of the house 



chapter iii 

the immediate results

as she took short cuts across the lawns  vera kept a sharp look out 
but no one was in sight  she had expected this  for if anyone had been
in the vicinity of the maze they would assuredly have been attracted
by howard’s shouts for assistance  she wasted no time in seeking in
the gardens for help  but hurried at her best speed to the house 
where she could at least get in touch with the police by means of the
telephone 

when  breathless with the last spurt she had made  she entered the
hall  she found it empty  the whole place seemed deserted and silent 
for a moment she thought of searching from room to room  but she
changed her mind almost immediately 

“i must keep my head ” she impressed on herself  “i know nothing about
the servants’ quarters and i’d lose time if i begin hunting  that last
sprint took it out of me  and i’m not fit to rush about  someone else
must do that instead ”

she passed into the nearest room and rang the bell  keeping her finger
pressed down on the button 

“that ought to bring them quick enough ”

in a few moments she heard steps  and one of the maids appeared  the
sight of her amazed face reminded vera of the picture she herself must
present  dishevelled  breathless  and without shoes on her feet 

“are there any men in the house  shelton? quick  don’t waste time ”

the maid stared at the haggard girl before her as though in this
strange figure she could hardly recognise the cool and graceful miss
forrest of normal life 

“what’s come to you  miss?” she asked  without replying to the
question 

“mr  shandon’s been murdered  is mr  stenness here  or mr  hawkhurst?
or anyone else? go and find them immediately  if they’re anywhere
about ”

then  as the girl still seemed dazed by the news 

“can’t you do as i tell you? hurry! there’s no time to lose ”

a picture rose in her mind of the murderer returning to the maze and
coming upon the defenceless howard  unlikely  of course  but after
this afternoon she would be slow to call anything unlikely  the maid’s
slowness irritated her overwrought nerves 

“ will  you go?”

but by this time the idea of murder had penetrated the dull mind of
shelton and produced a reaction which vera had not foreseen 

“mr  shandon murdered  and the man creeping about the place! i’d never
dare to go out of this room  miss  he might be in the hall now 
waiting for me  oh  oh!”

her voice rose in hysteria  vera looked at her wearily 

“want to scream  shelton? perhaps it’s the easiest way after all  i’d
have done it myself if i’d had any breath left  come along with me ”

and taking the hysterical girl with her  she made her way to the front
door 

“now scream as loud as you like ”

shelton had not waited for the suggestion  already she was shrieking
at the top of her voice 

“anybody in the house or near it ought to hear that ” vera said to
herself contentedly  as shelton continued to screech  “now  that’ll
do  will you be quiet? i want to listen if anyone has heard you ”

it proved more difficult to stop the outcry than it had been to start
it  the screams passed into a serious attack of hysteria  but they had
served their purpose  from the back of the house appeared two
panic stricken maids  while almost simultaneously stenness  the
secretary  hurried down the main staircase 

“thank goodness  a man at last!” vera said  in relief 

handing over the hysterical shelton to the care of the other maids 
she led stenness into the nearest room and gave him the state of
affairs in the fewest words  he listened intently without interrupting
her with a single question  from his unruffled manner  one might have
supposed that murders were all in the day’s work  and his calmness had
the effect of soothing vera’s nerves  which had been jarred afresh by
the maid’s outbreak  when she had completed her narrative he nodded in
comprehension and left the room for a few moments  on his return he
had a tumbler in his hand 

“drink this  miss forrest  you’ll need something to pull you together 
i’ve sent one of the maids to ring the bell in the stable yard 
that’ll bring up a couple of gardeners fairly soon  they’ll think it’s
a fire  you know ”

he persuaded her to sit down  then went to the bell and rang it  it
was some time before any answer was made  and finally shelton and
another maid appeared together  evidently clinging to each other for
company 

“go up and get fresh shoes and stockings for miss forrest  can’t you
see she needs them?”

when the two girls had gone he turned to vera 

“nothing like making them do something  otherwise we’d have the whole
lot down with their nerves ”

he glanced at his wrist watch  and seemed to be making some rather
intricate mental calculation which dissatisfied him 

“you’ll be safe enough here  miss forrest  i must get off to telephone
for the police and put them on the alert  then i’ll go down and get
mr  torrance out of the maze  you want nothing else?”

vera made a negative gesture  and he hurried out of the room  the
telephone occupied him for only a very short time  and in a few
minutes vera  through the window  saw him setting off in the direction
of the maze  accompanied by one of the gardeners  both  she noticed 
were armed with shot guns  she began to admire the efficiency of
stenness  hitherto she had looked upon him as the sort of man whose
life was spent in pure routine  and it was a mild surprise to find how
competently he had risen to this emergency  he had wasted neither
words nor time  everything essential had been done without hesitation 
he had even noticed her feet and had thought of sending for shoes and
stockings for her 

when the maids brought her fresh outfit she took the opportunity of
questioning them 

“was mr  stenness the only man in the house when i came back?”

“yes  miss  miss sylvia took her uncle away with her in the car—mr 
ernest  i mean  and mr  neville went out of the house before poor mr 
shandon did  and mr  hawkhurst  he went out quite early on  i saw him
passing the window with his air gun in his hand ”

vera had ceased to listen  the word “air gun” had linked up in her
mind with the memory of the dull concussions which she had heard in
the maze  that was the noise she had heard—the dull report of an
air rifle! and the metallic rasping was the grating of the spring as
the murderer recharged his weapon  but the recognition of the noises
left her even more perplexed 

“of course  one can kill a rabbit with an air gun  but one couldn’t
kill a man with it even at close range  and yet i’m certain it was an
air gun that i heard  i’d have recognised it at once if it hadn’t been
that i was so shaken up by the way things happened ”

she puzzled over the problem for a time without success  and at last
dismissed it from her mind and began to make arrangements which she
thought might be necessary when the men returned to the house 

meanwhile stenness  accompanied by the gardener  had made his way to
the maze  as they came in sight of it  they saw the figure of howard
torrance emerge from one of the entrances and gaze in their direction 
recognising the secretary  he came rapidly towards them 

“seen miss forrest  stenness?” he demanded as soon as he reached
speaking distance  “is she all right?”

“she fetched us ” stenness explained  “she’s completely done in  of
course  that’s natural  but i don’t think she’ll come to any harm  i
left two maids with her  just in case  though it looked more as if the
maids would collapse before she did ”

howard nodded without replying  and stenness continued 

“we’d better get into the maze now and stand guard over the body till
the police turn up  they’ll be here shortly ”

howard hesitated a moment 

“sure you know how to get about in that maze  stenness? you won’t get
tangled up? got bogged in it myself once already  no desire to have
another dose  you know ”

“there’s no danger of that  both skene and i know every inch of it  he
cuts the hedges ”

this seemed to allay howard’s doubts  and he led the way to the
entrance  but here stenness displaced him 

“i’ll take the lead  i think  i know the path  besides  one never can
tell  somebody may be in there yet ”

he tapped his shot gun in explanation of his full meaning  and howard
acquiesced 

“right! in you go!”

they entered the labyrinth  stenness in advance with his gun ready 
howard and the armed gardener bringing up the rear  for a minute or
two they walked in silence along the intricate corridors  stenness
taking turning after turning without the slightest hesitation 

“i wish i had had the thing by heart as he seems to have ” howard
reflected  as he noted the easy way in which the secretary seemed to
hold to his route  “it would have been a different business  then ”

all at once  stenness halted abruptly and made a gesture of caution to
his companions  his quick ears had caught something which they had
missed 

“there’s somebody moving in the next corridor ” he whispered  “wait
here  i’ll fix him ”

with his gun ready he stepped suddenly round the corner of the alley
and immediately they heard his curt command 

“hands up!”

when they in turn had rounded the corner they found the secretary
covering with his shot gun an unattractive stranger  the reddish hair 
the ugly mouth  made worse by a ragged and untidy moustache  the
peculiar vulpine expression  and the flashy clothes  all combined to
produce a bad impression even at the first glance  as he stood  hands
in air  in front of stenness’s gun  his eyes wandered from one face to
another with something of the expression of a rat at bay 

“run over this fellow  torrance ” said the secretary  “he may be
armed ”

howard searched the man methodically and extracted from one pocket a
heavy automatic pistol  beyond that  the man had no other weapon 

“see if it’s been fired ” suggested stenness 

“fully loaded  and hasn’t been fired ” howard reported 

“good! now  my man  how do you come to be here?”

“i was rowing on the river  and as i was coming near here  i heard
someone yelling blue murder  so i came up  what would you have done 
eh? kept away  i expect  then i came inside this monkey puzzle to give
a hand  and i’ve stuck here ever since  that satisfy you?”

“nothing to do with me  the police will be here shortly  you can
explain to them  meanwhile  you’ll come along with us  skene  take
charge of this fellow  if he tries to run  empty your gun into his
legs  now come along ”

again taking the van  stenness continued on his way  and in a very
short time he brought them to one of the centres of the maze 

howard torrance followed him into the tiny precinct  but his first
glance led him to protest 

“this isn’t the place where i found the body  it must be in the other
centre ”

stenness’s shoulders blocked the view for a moment  but almost at once
he stepped aside 

“there’s a body here  at any rate ” he said  going forward as he
spoke  “it’s roger shandon ”

“roger!” exclaimed howard in blank surprise  “it was neville shandon’s
body that i found ”

“then they’ve both been murdered ” stenness pointed out coldly 
“that’s obvious ”

“but what i heard sounded like a single attack ” protested howard 

stenness shrugged his shoulders 

“that’s for the police to explain ” he said  “no use barking yourself
when you keep a dog ”

he went forward and covered the face of the body with his
handkerchief 

“it’s roger  obviously  and stone dead  nothing more to do here  let’s
try the other centre next  skene  you needn’t come  keep your eye on
this fellow till we come back ”

he led howard through the alleys once more and in a short time they
entered the second centre of the maze 

“this is neville shandon  true enough ” the secretary reported  the
identification had taken longer  since the body lay on its face 
“mustn’t disturb anything  torrance  the police may be able to make
something out of it if we leave things alone ”

he rose from his knees and mechanically dusted his trousers as he
spoke  howard was struck by the extraordinary matter of fact way in
which stenness had treated the whole affair  one might have expected
some sign of emotion  surprise at the very least  but stenness had
gone through the whole business without showing the slightest
disturbance  but as howard reflected on the matter  he was forced to
admit that  after all  it was much what one might have anticipated 
stenness  he remembered  had always been chary of showing any emotion
whatever  probably this was just a case of carrying the normal to an
extreme where it became noticeable  stenness  doubtless  took a pride
in that mask of coolness 

the secretary stooped for a moment over neville shandon’s body and
examined the left hand which lay clenched on the grass 

“there’s a piece of paper there  it looks as if it had been wrenched
out of his hand and a scrap left in his grip  let’s see what one can
make of it without touching it ”

he knelt down and scrutinised the fragment painfully 

“some of his notes on the hackleton case  perhaps  i can read
‘hackl      ’ on it plain enough ”

howard did not trouble to look at the paper at close range 

“what do you make of it?” he demanded  as the secretary rose to his
feet again 

“i? nothing much  it might be someone trying to put neville shandon
out of business while the hackleton case is on  that might account for
the notes being taken  or it might be someone with a grudge against
roger  he had some enemies  a threatening letter came from a man only
the other day ”

howard digested these suggestions for a few moments without speaking 
then he offered an objection 

“but d’you think it’s likely that two murderers would choose an
identical moment for their attacks  two simultaneous crimes is a bit
of a record  it seems to me ”

“think so?” the secretary responded  carelessly  “it’s happened this
time  for all that ”

howard had to admit the truth of this 

stenness looked at his watch 

“i must be getting off to the outside of the maze  the police will be
here very soon  and they’ll need a guide  i’ll take you back to skene 
if you like ”

howard nodded assent and once more stenness led the way through a
tangle of alleys 

“here’s helen’s bower ” he said  nodding towards its entrance  “you
can sit down there till i bring the police ”

howard watched his figure disappear round a corner of the corridor and
then turned his steps to the entrance of the little enclosure where
roger shandon’s body lay  as he entered it  he was surprised to see
skene on his knees at the foot of the hedge  evidently collecting some
small objects 

“what are you after  skene?” he demanded  “i thought you were supposed
to be watching this fellow ”

skene rose to his feet  rather sulky at being reproved 

“he ain’t escaped yet  i’m ’tween him and the door ”

howard acknowledged the truth of both statements 

“what are you grubbing in the hedge for?” he continued  after he had
made his apology 

skene extended an earthy palm on which rested some small objects 

“’tis the lid of a tin box—one o’ these round ’uns  and here’s some
darts that mr  hawkhurst uses for that air gun o’ his when he’s
shootin’ at a target  let’s see       one       two       three      ”

he laboriously counted up to seven and held out his hand for
confirmation 

“put ’em in the box lid  skene  and lay ’em down somewhere safe  you
found them where i saw you searching?”

“just in there  among the roots o’ the hedge  like enough the other
bit o’ the box’ll be outside in the alley  i’ll have a look ”

“don’t bother  skene  we mustn’t disturb anything till the police get
here  you know  if there’s anything more  they’ll prefer to hunt for
it themselves  what you’ve got to remember is that you found these
seven things—seven  remember—at that point in the hedge  better mark
it with a stick or something  so that you’ll know the exact spot
again ”

the sight of the darts had put a thought into his mind  he went over
to roger shandon’s body and examined it carefully  but so far as the
exposed portions were concerned  he found no trace of the thing for
which he was searching  and he did not care to take the responsibility
of altering the posture of the corpse 

as he rose to his feet once more he heard the note of a motor horn in
the distance 

“the police  i expect ” he said to skene  “they’ll be here in a minute
or two  mr  stenness has gone to lead them in through the maze ”



chapter iv 

the chief constable

as stenness picked his way through the convolutions of the maze  his
face showed that his mind was at work on some puzzling problem 

“things haven’t worked out quite according to plan ” he commented to
himself as he walked along  “i’ve missed that train  now  and i may as
well see the business through on the spot  if only i’d aimed for the
earlier train  i might have pulled it off ”

his frown of annoyance faded out suddenly  as a new idea crossed his
mind 

“perhaps it’s all for the best after all  i never thought of that
point  nobody can swear to it  and it leaves me absolutely on
velvet—safer than ever ”

his face cleared completely as he considered the fresh situation which
had presented itself 

“this is worth a dozen of the other notion  all i have to do now is to
sit tight and keep a straight face ”

the secretary soon reached the outskirts of the maze  then  taking up
a position which commanded the road to the east gate  he sat down on
the grass and waited the arrival of the police 

before long  a motor horn sounded  and he rose to his feet as a big
car came tearing up the narrow private road  in the front seats were
two civilians  whilst the back held three uniformed policemen  long
before the motor reached him  stenness had recognised the man at the
wheel as the owner of a neighbouring estate 

“that’s wendover of talgarth grange  i wonder what he’s doing here ”

going out into the roadway  the secretary signalled them to stop and
the long car drew up as it came level with him  wendover jumped down
from the driving seat and came forward while the others were getting
out of the motor 

“sad business  this  stenness! terrible affair! is poor shandon really
dead? why  i saw him yesterday  poor chap ”

stenness was watching the remainder of the party  and he noticed that
there had been a dog in the car  it was now fawning on the second
civilian  evidently delighted to get out of its cramped quarters in
the motor  stenness turned back to his interlocutor 

“it’s worse than we supposed when i telephoned  two of the shandons
have been murdered in the maze  here ”

he nodded in the direction of the high green hedges 

wendover was completely taken aback 

“two of them! my godfathers! here  clinton!” he called to the second
civilian  “terrible business  this  there’s been a second murder ”

then  as the man with the dog came up to them  wendover turned back to
the secretary 

“this is the chief constable  sir clinton driffield  clinton  this is
mr  stenness  secretary to roger shandon ”

stenness examined the chief constable with what seemed more than
common interest  sir clinton was a slight man who looked about
thirty five  his sun tanned face  the firm mouth under the
close clipped moustache  the beautifully kept teeth and hands  might
have attracted a second glance in a crowd  but to counter this there
was deliberate ordinariness about his appearance  had a stranger 
meeting him casually  been asked later on to describe him  it would
have been difficult  for sir clinton designedly refrained from
anything characteristic in his dress  only his eyes failed to fit in
with the rest of his conventional appearance  and even them he had
disciplined as far as possible  normally  they had a bored expression 
but at times the mask slipped aside and betrayed the activity of the
brain behind them  when fixed on a man they gave a curious impression
as though they saw  not the physical exterior of the subject  but
instead the real personality concealed below the facial lineaments 

“a second case? h’m! you seem to be starting a wholesale trade at
whistlefield  mr  stenness ”

stenness was not impressed by the cheerfulness of the tone  he had
felt those keen eyes sweep over him  and though it had been anything
but a stare  he had the sensation of being appraised and catalogued
for future reference  he disliked the turn of the chief constable’s
phrase  too  whether intentionally or not  it seemed to verge on the
macabre 

“what about starting  eh?” wendover demanded  “get on the track while
the scent’s hot  clinton? every minute may count  you know ”

sir clinton assented with a nod and snapped his fingers to call his
dog to heel 

“suppose you show us the bodies  mr  stenness ”

without replying  stenness led the way into the maze  followed closely
by the whole party  the chief constable scanned the corridors as he
passed along  but made no comment  wendover evidently felt that some
explanation of his presence was due  for as they traversed the alleys
he overtook the secretary 

“curious coincidence  this  stenness  sir clinton’s a friend of mine 
and he happened to be staying with me just now for a few days  most
fortunate affair! when you ’phoned down to the police station  they
rang him up at once at the grange  i got out the car  of course  and
we picked up the constables at the station as we passed  couldn’t have
been better planned  could it?”

then  passing to a new line of thought  he added 

“terrible affair for the family! dreadful business! it’ll be a
frightful shock for miss hawkhurst  won’t it?”

before stenness could reply  they came to the entrance of one of the
centres of the maze  the secretary turned to the chief constable 

“this is what they call the pool of narcissus  sir clinton  we found
neville shandon’s body here  roger shandon’s body is lying in the
other centre of the maze ”

sir clinton nodded without replying  took off his hat  and entered the
enclosure  the body lay just as stenness had seen it last  and the
chief constable made no attempt to touch it  though he subjected it to
a most minute inspection 

“i forgot to tell you ” whispered wendover  “we ’phoned for a doctor
to come and examine the body  he’ll be here very soon ”

the chief constable rose lightly to his feet 

“two or three small wounds  apparently  but not much bleeding  once
the doctor’s overhauled him  we can make a fuller examination  in the
meantime things had better be left as they are  will you take us to
the other body now  mr  stenness?”

leaving one of the constables on guard over the corpse  the party made
its way  under stenness’s guidance  to the second centre of the maze 
on the road  wendover gave stenness some further information 

“most fortunate that driffield was on the spot  wasn’t it? he’ll get
to the bottom of things quick enough  trust him for that  he used to
be out in south africa  a big post in the police there  then he came
home for family reasons and dropped into the chief constableship here 
much too good a man for the place  you know  but it gives him enough
to keep him busy  by the way  he knew something about roger shandon
out at the cape ”

“i believe shandon made part of his money there ” stenness volunteered
in confirmation 

as they entered helen’s bower  stenness saw a momentary upward twitch
of sir clinton’s eyebrows as his glance lighted on the stranger whom
they had encountered in the maze 

“ah! mr  timothy costock?”

the captive showed much more surprise 

“why  it’s driffield  so it is! well  if that isn’t the damnedest
luck  there’s no keepin’ out o’ the way o’ you busies  it seems  but
you’re on the wrong track this shot  i never laid a finger on this
fellow ”

he indicated roger shandon’s body as he spoke 

“nobody’s accused you of laying a finger on him  or of anything
else—yet ” said sir clinton  curtly  “i’ll listen to your story later
on  don’t waste time elaborating it  you’ll find the plain truth’s
best  this is more serious than illicit diamond buying ”

he paused for an instant  then continued 

“now i think of it  you were shandon’s cat’s paw that time i got my
hands on you at kimberley ”

then  as costock opened his mouth in protest  sir clinton cut him
short abruptly 

“i’d keep my mouth shut  if i were you  nobody’s asking you to
incriminate yourself ”

the hint was sufficient for the ex i d b  expert  his protest died on
his lips  sir clinton paid no further attention to him  but set about
a careful examination of the body of roger shandon  as he rose to his
feet again  stenness came forward 

“this is mr  howard torrance  sir clinton  a guest at the house  he
was in the maze at the moment when the murder was done  torrance  this
is the chief constable ”

he turned to the gardener 

“this is skene  sir clinton  one of the gardeners on the estate  he
came with me here as soon as we learned what had happened ”

sir clinton nodded a brief appreciation of stenness’s explanations 
the secretary had wasted no words over the business  and yet had given
all the information necessary at the moment 

howard torrance  thus brought to the front  seized the opportunity
offered to him 

“some darts here  skene found them at the foot of the hedge  lid of a
tin box was lying beside them as well ”

sir clinton picked up the lid and inspected the tiny missiles which
had been collected 

“air gun darts  evidently ” he commented 

characteristically enough  he did not call attention to the equally
obvious fact that they were not ordinary air gun darts  the woollen
feathering  instead of showing the usual gaudy colours  was stained
brown  and a rusty powder seemed to cling to the fibre  a tiny patch
of the same pigment showed on the metal jackets of the darts  near the
points  sir clinton put the collection down again carefully 

“now  skene ” he said  turning to the gardener  “that was a good piece
of work of yours  can you show me exactly where you found these
things?”

obviously delighted with the chief constable’s compliment  skene was
only too ready to indicate the precise position where he had picked up
the darts and the box lid 

“you got the lot  i suppose? at least all you could see from here?”

howard torrance  watching the chief constable  was surprised to see
that his eyes  instead of searching the ground  seemed to be ranging
over the surface of the hedge  and when skene answered the question 
sir clinton’s thoughts appeared to be elsewhere  he turned to
stenness 

“can you take us to the other side of this hedge at that point?”

stenness led the way once more into the maze  and sir clinton found
that quite a considerable distance had to be traversed before they
reached the required position 

“this is the place?” he inquired  as stenness came to a halt  “that’s
clear enough ” he added  as he stooped to pick something from the side
of the path  when he held it out  they recognised it as the bottom of
the tin box of which the lid had already been found  sir clinton
turned to the constables 

“hunt about and see if you can find any more of these darts  you
mustn’t miss a single one  remember  and handle them carefully 
they’re deadly things  evidently ”

then  as stenness and howard torrance showed signs of joining in the
search  the chief constable stopped them with a gesture 

“i think we’ll leave the officials to do the work ” he said with a
certain finality in his tone 

again he appeared to be more interested in the hedge itself than in
the roots where more darts might be hidden  and after a moment or two
he went forward and seemed to peer closely into the greenery at one
particular point  when he stepped back again  howard moved forward in
curiosity  and sir clinton made way for him  as he brought his eye to
the position in which he had seen the chief constable’s  he looked
into a concealed loop hole  the twigs had been trimmed away to form a
tunnel  the ends of which had been left covered with a thin screen of
leafage  and a glance through the aperture showed that it bore
directly on the chair in which roger shandon had been killed 

but already sir clinton seemed to have lost interest in the matter  he
whistled  and the dog which had been left behind in helen’s bower came
running to him 

“have a sniff ” he invited the animal  holding out to it the part of
the tin box which he still held in his hand  “now see what you can
make of it ”

he turned to his companions 

“it’s a poor chance  don’t blame the animal if it fails ”

part of sir clinton’s character was revealed in the whimsical apology 
he was always noted for his loyalty to his subordinates and his
readiness to recognise the impossibility of some tasks  it was the
complement to his sternness when he had to deal with inefficiency 

“that’s right! good dog! he’s on to something!” wendover announced
unnecessarily 

the beast had apparently picked up some scent or other  for it hurried
off along the alleys  followed by sir clinton and the other three men 
the constables were left to their search among the hedge roots 

it was anything but a simple route along which the dog led them  for
it seemed to wind backwards and forwards almost at haphazard 

“nobody who knew the maze would have tried to get out this way ”
stenness commented at last 

his remark was hardly needed  for already the dog had more than once
halted in the middle of an open alley and then retraced its course for
no obvious reason  it was howard torrance who saw the meaning of these
intricate tracings before the remainder of the party 

“of course!” he explained  “the murderer didn’t go straight out of the
maze immediately  probably he found miss forrest and myself blocking
the road again and again as we wandered about  and he’d got to avoid
being seen by us  that’s why he had to turn and wind about like this ”

at last the dog led them to the edge of the maze  passed out through
the iron gate  and went on eagerly across the grass  the track had
brought them to the river side of the labyrinth  where a tiny clump of
trees had been planted  and into this the dog plunged  a few paces
further on it halted for a moment at the foot of a tree 

“perhaps he climbed that ” wendover suggested  going up and examining
the trunk  “look! there’s a faint mark here on the trunk  just about
the height that a man could reach with his foot ”

sir clinton examined the mark  which was very slight indeed  then he
looked at the dog  which had set off in a fresh direction 

“i suppose he must have got tired of the view and come down again  in
that case  one usually does come down  one rarely climbs higher than
the top ”

he set off after the dog  which was now making for the road running
past the maze  but here it seemed to go astray  it snuffed about with
the utmost eagerness  casting wider and wider in its attempt to
recapture the scent  but soon it was clear that it had lost the track 
sir clinton took it back to the tree once more and allowed it to start
afresh  this time he followed closely on its track  and his companions
noticed that he had pulled some paper from his pocket and was
scattering tiny fragments on the grass to mark the animal’s route  but
this attempt also ended in failure  beyond the road  the trail seemed
to be lost 

“we may as well give it up ” sir clinton admitted  “one can’t expect
infallibility from a dumb animal ”

as he called the beast off  a motor horn sounded  and they saw a car
coming from the direction of the house 

“that’s our doctor  i expect ” sir clinton surmised  and stenness
confirmed the guess 

in a few minutes they had all made their way to helen’s bower  under
stenness’s guidance  once there  the doctor proposed to begin his
examination of the bodies  but the chief constable intervened 

“just a moment  doctor  before you shift anything  i want to take one
or two photographs  nothing like a permanent record for future
reference ”

he took a case which one of the constables had carried and produced
from it one of the largest sized kodaks  then  by the marks of the
feet in the grass  he replaced the overturned chair in its proper
position  and finally he marked the position of the loophole in the
hedge by means of a scrap of paper 

“i want something to give the scale ” he explained  at the last
moment  “would you mind sitting in the chair  mr  stenness? and
perhaps you’d stand by the loophole  mr  torrance?”

he looked round the enclosure for an instant 

“and here  costock  you get over into that corner  it’ll give some
notion of the distance ”

when they had placed themselves  he took several photographs from
various positions 

“now  doctor  you can get to work if you like ”

the doctor made only a cursory examination 

“i think it would be best to shift the body up to the house  the
light’s not very good here  now the sun’s going down  besides  i’ll
need to do more than i can do in this place ”

“there’s a second body waiting for you ” sir clinton explained  “we’ve
the whole thing to do over again ”

the doctor  a taciturn man  shrugged his shoulders without making any
audible comment and they made their way  guided by stenness  to the
pool of narcissus  sir clinton gave some directions to his constables
and despatched the gardener to the house to bring down something on
which the bodies could be carried  then the photographic procedure was
repeated  and the doctor made his examination of neville shandon’s
corpse 

“there must be a loophole in this hedge as well ” the chief constable
mused aloud  “but it’s not worth while hunting for it at present  it
won’t run away ”

the constables reported the discovery of several fresh darts which had
fallen either into the hedge itself or among the roots on the outer
side  skene  it appeared  had secured all those on the inner border 
sir clinton counted the tiny projectiles carefully  dropped them into
the tin box  and put the box in his pocket 

“that’s eleven altogether  go back and hunt for anything more  i must
have every one of these darts if you have to finish the search by
lamplight  make absolutely certain that you miss nothing ”

skene arrived shortly afterwards with two other gardeners carrying
hurdles  and the two bodies were transported to the cars and so
conveyed to the house  two more constables had arrived  and these were
put under the guidance of skene and given instructions to search the
whole of the maze for anything suspicious 

when the bodies had been taken up to a bedroom  sir clinton and the
doctor carried out a minute examination  each victim had been struck
by three darts  in the case of neville shandon  the wounds suggested
that the shots had been fired from the front and rather to one side 
roger’s body  on the other hand  contained one dart imbedded in the
back of the neck  and two in the upper part of the rear surface
between the spine and the shoulder on the left side  beyond the
punctures made by the darts  neither victim showed a trace of either
wound or struggle 

“poison  obviously ” sir clinton concluded 

the doctor agreed  adding in confirmation 

“none of these darts came near a vital spot  alone  they’d never have
killed a man ”

“can you guess what poison was used?”

the doctor shook his head 

“not my line  some of these indian arrow poisons  perhaps  ardsley
could tell you something about them  most likely ”

“who’s ardsley? could one get hold of him quickly?”

“he lives less than a mile from here  he’s a medical  but he doesn’t
practise  curiously enough  toxicology is his line  more or less  he’s
a bit of a physiologist  too  i know he has a vivisection licence  you
might do worse than look him up  he might be able to give you a hint ”

sir clinton looked thoughtful for a moment 

“what worries me is that a man can’t be in two places at once  i’m
going to take over this case myself  and there’s enough work on hand
in the next hour to keep two men busy  it’s time i’m up against at
present ”

the doctor  reflecting on the conflicting calls of a country practice 
was inclined to think that sir clinton seemed to make a fuss about
very little 



chapter v 

the evidence in the case

when the doctor had completed his work and left the room  sir clinton
pulled the tin box of darts from his pocket and went over to the
window to examine it  the box itself suggested nothing in the way of a
clue  it was of a common pattern  he turned from it to the darts
themselves 

“that brown stuff on the feathering is evidently the poison  whatever
it may be ” he reflected  “it doesn’t seem much of a dose to kill a
man  especially if one assumes that it was a quick death  even
ordinary snake poison would hardly do the trick quick enough  and yet
these fellows didn’t seem to have moved much after they were hit  to
judge by the look of the ground ”

he took a coddington lens from his pocket and scanned one of the darts
carefully  then with a pin he probed a dark spot near the point of the
projectile 

“so that’s it! he’s drilled a hole clean through the metal and filled
up the hollow with poison  that would mean a fair quantity driven well
home under the skin  and the blood would soon wash the stuff out of
the cavity  since both ends are open  an ingenious devil  evidently ”

he thoughtfully replaced the dart in the box  but before putting the
tin back into his pocket he counted the missiles carefully 

“eleven of them here  and six more in the two bodies ”

he glanced at the open box again  trying to estimate its probable
capacity 

“that must have been the lot ”

the doctor had extracted the six fatal darts from the bodies and left
them lying on a piece of lint on the dressing table  sir clinton
rolled them up cautiously  took his cigarette case from his pocket 
emptied out the contents  and inserted the packet of darts instead 

“i’m not likely to get pricked now  short of a big smash ”

after putting the cigarette case and the tin box containing the darts
into his pockets  he left the room and went downstairs  the windows
throughout the house had been darkened  but sir clinton found his way
in the semi obscurity to roger shandon’s study  and here he came upon
wendover  the two guests  and the secretary  costock had been left in
the hall in charge of a constable 

“now ” sir clinton said  as he sat down  “i’m afraid i shall have to
trouble you for information  what i want first of all are the plain
facts—nothing else  we’ll come to suspicions afterwards  which of you
saw the shandons alive last?”

“i believe i did ” the secretary volunteered  “at about ten minutes
past three this afternoon  roger shandon sent one of the maids for me 
and i came straight to this room  he gave me some directions about
letters  while he was doing this  neville shandon looked into the
room  he had some papers in his hand  seeing us engaged  he went away
again  that would be about twenty five past three  approximately 
almost immediately after that  roger shandon dismissed me  and i
noticed him from the window  going towards the maze  that was the last
i saw of either of them  till i found their bodies in the maze ”

sir clinton went to the writing table and made a note 

“you saw neville shandon last at about 3 25 p m   and roger at  say 
3 30 p m ?”

“as near as i can gauge the times ” stenness confirmed 

sir clinton considered for a moment 

“i judge that it would take a man walking at an ordinary pace at least
ten minutes—say eleven or twelve—to reach the maze from the house 
that means that neville shandon could have reached the maze at 3 37 
and roger might have got there at 3 42  but possibly they were some
minutes later than that  and quite possibly  also  they may have
arrived in a different order  since no one seems to have seen them
actually enter the maze  so far as we have gone with the story ”

the secretary indicated assent to this with a nod  sir clinton turned
next to torrance 

“i take it that you can carry our information further?”

howard torrance gave his version of the events up to the moment when
he discovered the body of neville shandon in the enclosure by the pool
of narcissus 

“exact times are what we want ” sir clinton reminded him when he had
completed his narrative 

“can’t give you anything except two  i happened to look at my watch
while miss forrest and i were sitting under the trees  it was some
time after three  then—i think it was twenty past three  but i
couldn’t swear to it  i took the time when i found neville shandon’s
body  it was 3 52  i could swear to that  for i particularly noted it 
knowing it might be wanted ”

sir clinton jotted down these figures also 

“now  miss forrest  i know you’ve had a very trying time  i don’t want
to worry you unnecessarily  but it’s essential to get your evidence as
to what happened in the maze  take your time  and don’t let yourself
get excited  it’s all over now ”

vera gave him her account  to which he listened without putting any
questions until she had finished 

“thanks very much  miss forrest  there’s just one point  you heard
steps in the maze several times  a man running at one period and going
on tiptoe at other times  you’re sure of that?”

“quite sure  i’m not likely to forget it soon ”

“i can quite understand that ” said sir clinton  soothingly  for the
girl was evidently affected by the mere remembrance of what she had
gone through  “i’m merely asking these questions to make sure of my
ground  you know  you couldn’t have mistaken mr  torrance’s footsteps
for those of the murderer by any chance?”

at this question  the secretary’s face showed a gleam of
enlightenment  as though he had detected a point which he had
previously missed  he glanced at howard torrance for an instant as
though trying to read his face  then he looked again at the girl 

“i hadn’t thought of that ” vera admitted frankly  “but i don’t think
i did ”

“you heard mr  torrance’s voice from time to time ” sir clinton
continued  “i’m trying to suggest that he may have called from a
distance at the same time as you heard the steps near at hand  you
see  it’s essential to find out exactly when the murderer left the
maze if possible  and we can only do that by checking his movements in
the maze ”

vera thought for a moment or two before she replied 

“i can’t recall it  you know  sir clinton  i was nearly out of my mind
with panic  i didn’t take note of things  i couldn’t  and there’s
another thing—i did notice that i couldn’t make out the directions
from which sounds came  the maze seemed to shift them about anyhow  i
really couldn’t tell where mr  torrance was at any time when he
shouted to me ”

sir clinton nodded 

“i’d rather have you say that than try to strain your memory to make
things fit  now  just to make sure  you really did hear the murderer’s
steps—or at any rate some steps—quite close to you—on the other side
of the hedge  once? and that was before you found roger shandon’s
body?”

vera nodded assent to both questions  to her relief  sir clinton
turned to stenness 

“did you note the time when miss forrest got back to the house again?”

“i looked at my watch when she was telling me her story  it was then
4 42  i reached the maze myself at 5 16 ”

“you were in your own room upstairs when miss forrest came to the
house?”

“yes  my room is at the back  so i could not have seen her coming in 
even if i’d been looking out of my window  my first warning of the
whole affair was when the maid began to scream ”

sir clinton added a jotting to his notes  then he turned to the
company with a relaxation of his official air 

“these are the facts  then—the things you could swear to in the
witness box  i take it that you’ve told me all that’s relevant  but 
candidly  these facts don’t take us far  the police don’t profess to
know the details of people’s private lives  but when an affair of this
sort crops up we have to poke our noses in  whether we like it or not 
hitherto we’ve kept to the facts  but now i’d like  if possible  to
get your personal views of the meaning of the facts  you probably have
intimate knowledge of affairs at whistlefield which i haven’t got 
does it suggest anything to you in connection with this case?”

he glanced from face to face without putting a direct question to any
of his hearers  vera forrest was the first to speak 

“i know almost as little as you do yourself  sir clinton  i’m a friend
of sylvia  of course  but i know no more about her uncles’ affairs
than a casual visitor might pick up in a few days’ stay at the house 
the whole thing is an absolute mystery so far as i’m concerned ”

howard torrance had the same story to tell 

“i’m in much the same state as miss forrest  neville shandon i met for
the first time a few days ago  roger was only a casual acquaintance 
and i never felt inclined to force myself into his intimacy  i’m
really a guest of miss hawkhurst  just as miss forrest is ”

sir clinton turned to the secretary 

“you’ve perhaps had better opportunities  mr  stenness?”

the secretary admitted this with a nod 

“i’ve been secretary to mr  roger shandon for the last two
years—nearly three  do you expect me to divulge anything about his
private affairs?”

“anything that seems useful  it can’t hurt him now ”

“then i needn’t conceal that from time to time he received threatening
letters  the last one came only a few days ago  it was written by this
man costock who’s outside in the hall  i can produce it if necessary ”

sir clinton contented himself with saying  “i know something about
costock’s career ” he looked at stenness as though he expected more 
but the secretary seemed to have nothing to add on that subject 

“perhaps you could tell us about the relations between the various
members of the family  that must have come under your notice ” sir
clinton suggested 

stenness considered for a moment as though arranging his facts 

“the three brothers always seemed to me to be on good enough terms  i
never noticed any ill feeling amongst them  neville was rather a
bully—in his manner  i mean  he always treated one as if one were a
hostile witness  but probably that was just a mannerism  roger was
hot tempered at times  he didn’t hit it off with his nephew somehow 
but as far as i saw  the feeling was all on one side  young hawkhurst
seems a harmless boy—rather moody since he had that attack of sleepy
sickness ”

sir clinton seemed to prick up his ears at the words 

“he had sleepy sickness  had he? any ill effects?”

“nothing that one could see  except this instability—moodiness or
whatever you like to call it  very cheery one day and rather depressed
soon afterwards  i noticed at times ”

sir clinton did not pursue the subject 

“have you heard of any ill feeling locally?” he asked  “i mean
friction with the maids  or the gardeners  or the neighbours?”

stenness racked his memory for a moment or two 

“no  nothing that i can recall  there was some slight disagreement
with dr  ardsley over fishing rights not long ago  and a few angry
letters passed between him and roger shandon  but it wasn’t an
important matter—rather a squabble  but nothing to leave real
ill feeling ”

“do you know anything about money matters? they were both well off?”

“neville was believed to make enormous fees in some cases  roger  i
know  had plenty of money  he often sent me to cash bearer cheques on
his account and some of them ran into thousands ”

“and he took cash for these? rather unusual ”

“my impression was that he gambled a good deal—roulette and that sort
of thing—for high stakes  i’ve often paid in large sums in notes on
his behalf ”

sir clinton seemed to make a mental note of this 

“now what about the third brother—ernest  i think his name is?”

a faint expression of contempt crossed stenness’s face at the mention
of ernest’s name 

“he’s not like his brothers ”

then the disdain of the efficient man for his inefficient fellow broke
out 

“he seems never to have done anything  so far as i know  his brothers
kept him going  he spends his time loafing about  fishing  shooting 
or just hanging round  it was his fishing  as a matter of fact  that
led to the row with dr  ardsley ”

sir clinton leaned forward in his chair and looked at the secretary
keenly 

“all this is very interesting  mr  stenness  but i have an idea that
there’s something in your mind that you haven’t told us  what is it?”

the secretary gave him look for look before replying 

“i don’t think this is a local affair at all  the evidence points away
from that  entirely ”

“ah! now this is what i really wanted  mr  stenness ”

thus encouraged stenness wasted no time 

“when neville shandon looked into the room before going to the maze 
he had a sheaf of papers in his hand  when i examined his body i
noticed a scrap of paper—a torn bit  i could read ‘hackl      ’ on it
in neville’s writing  and a few other words as well ”

“that’s quite correct ” interrupted sir clinton  “i have it in my
pocket book  and you infer       ?”

“i infer that that scrap is all that remains of his notes for his
cross examination of hackleton which was to come off this week ”

“in other words  you think someone in hackleton’s pay is the murderer 
and the intention was to put neville shandon out of the case finally?”

“that’s your statement  not mine ” said stenness  suddenly becoming
cautious  “but it’s been done before now ”

sir clinton nodded 

“you’re thinking of the shooting of labori in the dreyfus case  i
suppose?”

“that would be a parallel case to the one you sketched ”

“and the notes might be useful to hackleton’s side as showing the
probable line of attack beforehand?”

stenness maintained his caution 

“that’s your suggestion  not mine ”

“but assuming that ” demanded sir clinton  “why was roger shandon
murdered at all? he had nothing to do with the case ”

stenness had his answer ready 

“assume that twin brothers resemble each other closely and even dress
alike  mightn’t a stranger mistake one for the other and kill him?
obviously  and then he might find that he’d made an error if the
second brother turned up  the second man is the man he’s been paid to
put out of the way  wouldn’t he finish his job?”

“that’s an ingenious theory  mr  stenness ” commented sir clinton  but
he refrained from saying anything further 

howard torrance had listened carefully 

“hardly think that’ll fit  though  neville was dead when i came across
him  and i’d just heard roger shouting       at least       at any
rate ” he stumbled for a moment  then recanted  “no  you may be right 
i was confusing the order of finding the bodies with the order of the
murders ”

“there’s no proof of the order of the murders ” stenness pointed out 
“both of them were dead when they were found  and that’s all we know ”

at this moment steps sounded outside  the door opened noisily  and sir
clinton saw a stranger enter the room  at the sight of the air gun in
the newcomer’s hand  vera forrest gave a slight exclamation 

“this is sir clinton driffield  mr  hawkhurst ” stenness hastened to
explain  “the chief constable ”

arthur hawkhurst leaned his air gun against the wall and came forward 

“d’you usually travel with an escort  sir?” he inquired with a boyish
grin  “a bobby and a plain clothes man in the hall outside  i see ”

then  turning to stenness  he went on 

“uncle roger anywhere about? i owe the old man an apology  he’s rather
peevish with me over the piano  you know  and i must smooth him down 
not let the sun go down on his wrath  et cetera ”

stenness threw an interrogative glance at sir clinton  getting the
answer he expected  he broke the news to arthur 

“what! both of ’em killed! nonsense!”

then the sight of the chief constable and the recollection of the
uniformed man outside seemed to convince him 

“of course! that accounts for the bobby  and they’re both gone  you
say? poor old birds! poor old birds!”

it was hardly the requiem which might have been expected  but it
seemed sincere enough in tone if not in words  he added thoughtfully 

“and now i’ll never get that apology off my chest  after brooding over
it all afternoon  i owed him that ”

sir clinton crossed the room and picked up the air gun 

“this seems pretty strong  can you kill anything with it?”

arthur’s grief seemed to pass away with the opening up of a fresh
subject 

“i was out with it in the spinney this afternoon  potting rabbits  it
makes less noise than a rook rifle  scares the bunnies less when you
fire  but i only got a couple of brace in the whole afternoon ”

sir clinton made no reply  he tried the spring of the air gun  looked
to see that the weapon was unloaded  and then pulled the trigger  for
a weapon of its size the report was not loud  he was about to try it a
second time when his ear was caught by a sound of limping footsteps in
the passage  again the door of the room opened  and sir clinton
hastily put the gun back against the wall 

ernest shandon shuffled into the room and blinked round the assembled
group in dull surprise 

“i’ve had a devil of a time ” he said grumpily  “i’ve been walking
miles with a nail in my boot ”

stenness stepped into the breach once more and explained the state of
affairs  at first  ernest seemed frankly incredulous 

“this must be a joke of yours  stenness  what i mean to say is  the
thing’s impossible  murders don’t happen to people like us  you know 
it’s the kind of thing one finds among the lower classes ”

he peered from face to face  as if expecting to see a smile on one of
them  but the seriousness of the company at last appeared to bring the
truth home to him 

“you really mean it?”

he sank into a chair and gazed round the company once more as though
dazed by the realisation of the tragedy 

“both of ’em? why  i was talking to them both not three hours ago  we
were talking about that shackleton case—or is it hackleton? i remember
neville asking if i read the newspapers  and roger       what was it
roger said?       oh  yes  now i remember  roger was giving neville a
hint that hackleton might find it worth his while to sandbag him or
something like that  i can’t think why  but roger was very strong
about that  i remember  and then i went off and left them together 
and now you say they’re both dead! i can’t believe it  stenness  why 
i was talking to them not three hours ago  or even less  it may be 
here in this very room ”

“it’s unfortunately true  mr  shandon ” howard torrance assured him 
“i found the body of mr  neville shandon myself ”

ernest paid no attention to him  he seemed to be quite thunderstruck 
now that the news had penetrated his mind  at last he roused himself
sufficiently to ask for some details  to which he listened with a sort
of heavy interest 

“and they were killed by poisoned darts  you say? and i’ve got a nail
in my boot myself  i might get blood poisoning from it  if i’m not
careful  i never thought of that till now ”

sir clinton had allowed a decent interval to elapse before entering
the conversation  but he now glanced at his watch and put a question 

“can you tell us when you last saw your brothers alive  mr  shandon?”

ernest reflected for some moments as though trying to fix the time 
then he shook his head regretfully 

“i’d arranged to go in the car with sylvia—my niece  you know—but she
said i was late and she hurried me off to get ready  i was a bit
hustled at the last moment  but sylvia could tell you  most likely 
she’s always punctual and she’d remember when we left ”

“it was just before i saw mr  neville shandon look in that door that i
heard your car leaving  mr  shandon ” stenness volunteered  “that
would be about ten minutes past three ”

ernest nodded vaguely 

“i remember she sent me to put my boots on  that reminds me  my foot’s
very sore  i hope it isn’t blood poisoning ”

quite regardless of the company he began to unlace his boot and
finally examined a slight tear in his sock  he was busily engaged in
feeling inside his boot for the nail before he spoke again 

“that nail came up just after sylvia dropped me outside the grounds  i
walked on for a bit  but it began to hurt  you know how a nail in your
boot hurts? so i sat down for a bit by the roadside  and luckily the
postman came along in his cart and gave me a lift after a while  or i
don’t know what i’d have done  i’d nothing to hammer it flat with  you
see ”

he returned to an inspection of his foot 

sir clinton glanced at his watch  and even his impassive face showed a
trace of impatience 

“i’m sorry  mr  shandon  but i must get some facts from you before i
go  it’s essential  or i should not trouble you at this time ”

ernest looked up with a long suffering expression 

“oh  ask any questions you please  if i can give any information you
want  i’ll be glad to do it  quite glad  it’s a sad affair for me  for
all of us  anything i can do  of course  by the way  do you mind if i
ring for tea? i’ve had nothing since lunch time and i feel a bit
tired  one misses one’s tea  it would brighten me up  i think ”

quite oblivious of the astonishment of the company he rang the bell
and gave his order 

“now  mr  shandon  perhaps you’ll give me your attention  i understand
that your family consisted of yourself  your two brothers  and the
late mrs  hawkhurst  your sister  am i right  or have you any
relations except your nephew and niece?”

ernest blinked for a moment or two as if considering 

“nobody nearer than a second cousin once removed  at least  i think
that’s what you call it  she’s the daughter of a second cousin  lives
in bath  i think ”

“another point ” continued sir clinton  “can you tell me if anyone
could get the opportunity of learning the maze without being noticed?
the gardeners know the paths  of course  but can you think of anyone
else?”

ernest again blinked for some seconds while he thought over the
matter 

“ardsley took an interest in it at one time—that was before he made
such a fuss over the fishing  he hasn’t been here since that row  not
that i bore any grudge over it  you understand  far from it  one may
differ from a man without letting bad feeling come in  i always think 
don’t you?”

sir clinton refused to follow him into this by path 

“nobody else?”

“no  i can remember nobody who ever took the slightest interest in it 
it’s not  somehow  the sort of thing that does interest people  what i
mean to say is  there’s not much use in it  is there?”

sir clinton diverged for an instant from his usual reticence 

“it’s strange the murderer didn’t leave some trace  then  i’d have
expected to find him using a thread to guide him out of the maze—like
theseus in the labyrinth ”

he paused for a moment  then added 

“but perhaps he rolled it up as he went out  so as to leave nothing
behind ”

he rose as he spoke and put his last questions 

“do you suspect anyone in this matter  mr  shandon? was there anyone
in the background whom we haven’t heard about? a woman  for instance?”

ernest shandon seemed to ponder these queries in his dull way 

“no ” he said at last  “i don’t think so  not to my knowledge  at
least  of course my brothers had their own affairs  but that’s to be
expected in families  isn’t it? i mean  they didn’t tell me
everything  of course  but bar this shackleton business  i can’t say i
ever heard anything that would fit the case  no  i can’t remember ever
hearing anything of the sort ”

the chief constable wasted no further time 

“i shall have to come back again  mr  shandon  will you think over the
matter meanwhile and take a note of anything you think likely to help
us  and you also ” he added  turning to the rest of the group 

as the door was closing behind him and wendover  he heard ernest’s
verdict  delivered in a disconsolate tone 

“this’ll be an infernal bother!”

in the hall  they found costock in charge of a constable and
apparently resigned to his detention  when questioned  he added but
little to the story which he had told earlier in the day to stenness 

“what brought you to this neighbourhood at all?” sir clinton demanded 
“you don’t expect us to believe that you came here by pure chance  do
you?”

“no ” costock admitted  “if i was pitchin’ a yarn to a flattie or to
an ordinary busy  i’d say that  an’ i’d stick to it  but you know a
bit too much about me  driffield  an’ it wouldn’t take with you  so
i’ll just take an’ tell you the truth  so i will ”

sir clinton’s smile showed more than a touch of unbelief 

“make it the whole truth  when you’re at it ” he advised  “and begin
by explaining how you happen to be here at this particular period ”

“well  you see  this shandon man—roger—he owed me something  so he
did  he didn’t play straight with me out at kimberley ”

“so you came home as soon as you got out  to blackmail him? that’s
obvious  you needn’t protest  costock  it’s really not of any
importance  for i’m quite convinced that you didn’t reach the stage of
negotiations  so there’s no harm done  you put up in the village 
waiting for a chance to see him alone  i suppose?”

costock nodded 

“and now explain how you came to be in at the death  please ”

“it was this way  as i was going through the village i came on a
boatman  it’s a hot day  so i thought i’d go on the river for a row ”

“and perhaps spy out the land  seeing that the grounds are easily
accessible from the river bank?”

“well  i don’t say yes and i don’t say no  it might have come in
handy ”

“and you took a pistol with you on your outing?”

costock had his explanation ready 

“i thought as perhaps i’d run across shandon and we might get talking 
he’s a violent tempered swine—leastways  he was so  and ’t seemed to
me best to have a quietener in my pocket  for i’d have stood no chance
at all against him  man to man  he could ha’ licked me with one hand ”

“when did you leave the boat house in the village?”

“’bout three o’clock  as near as i can remember  but the boatman could
tell you  he took the time for hirin’ the boat ”

“you came up the river fairly slowly  then  and what happened after
that?”

“as i came along  i noticed a little private boat house and a
landing stage  i knew that would be shandon’s place  for i’d asked the
boatman about it  just as i was coming abreast of it  i heard some
yells  so i stopped rowing and let the boat drift  then i heard
someone squalling ‘murder’ at the pitch of his voice  behind some
hedges near by the water  so i pulled in  hitched up my boat  and ran
through the nearest hole in the hedge  and then i got tangled up in
that fandango of a thing they have there—what they call the maze ”

“you didn’t see anyone running away from the maze before you got in?”

“no ”

“did you run about in the maze or did you walk?”

costock considered for a moment or two 

“i walked  once i was inside  i got tangled up  as i told you  and i
didn’t want to be running round corners slap into a murderer ”

“and then?”

“oh  after that i heard a lot o’ shoutin’ and a girl screamin’ an’ all
that sort o’ thing  but i was that tangled up i could get nowhere  i’d
got fair lost in that infernal monkey puzzle ”

sir clinton turned to wendover 

“this fellow was searched  wasn’t he?”

“yes  nothing on him but the pistol  and we took that away ”

sir clinton turned back to costock 

“you can go now  but you’ll have to stay in the village for a day or
two  you’ll be wanted at the inquest  i may as well tell you that
you’ll be watched  so it’s no use trying to bolt ”

he dismissed the ex i d b  with scant ceremony  handed his dog over to
the care of the constable with orders to take it to the grange  and
then went down the steps to wendover’s car 



chapter vi 

the toxicologist

“the next port of call  squire  will be dr  ardsley’s ” sir clinton
informed his companion as they seated themselves in the car  “and you
can put a bit of hurry into it  if you like ”

wendover’s appearance had earned him the kindly nickname which the
chief constable used  he was one of those red faced  hearty country
gentlemen who  on first acquaintance  give an entirely erroneous
impression of themselves  met casually  he might quite easily have
appeared to be a slightly fussy person of very limited intellect and
even more restricted interests  but behind that façade lived a fairly
acute brain which took a certain sly delight in exaggerating the
misleading mannerisms  wendover was anything but a fool  though he
liked to pose as one 

“all right ” he said  as the pace of the car increased  “it won’t take
long to get there  but what do you know about ardsley? never mentioned
him to you  so far as i can remember ”

“well  don’t put off any longer  tell me something about him now ”
suggested sir clinton  “all i know is that he’s an expert in poisons
or something of that sort ”

wendover pricked up his ears 

“‘poisons ’ sez you? you don’t think      ”

but sir clinton was not to be drawn so easily 

“you’re quite right  squire  i don’t think  i never caught the knack
of it  somehow  just tell me all about ardsley  will you  and put it
in a nutshell  for we haven’t much time ”

“ardsley?” wendover ruminated  “ardsley’s one of these damned
vivisectionists  doesn’t even need to do it for a living  either  just
cuts up dogs and cats for pleasure  i suppose  since he’s got a
private income  he’s one of these cold blooded beggars  all brains and
no emotions  and that sort of thing  swarms up mountains for
amusement  they say—quite good at it  too  member of alpine club  i
believe  he’s a good fisherman  got an eye like a hawk and seems to
have the devil’s own luck in clearing the streams round about here  he
had a row with roger shandon over that  i remember ”

he pondered for a moment 

“that seems all about ardsley ”

a fresh subject occurred to him 

“not arresting anybody yet  clinton? seems funny to have two murders
and no arrests  aren’t you afraid of letting the fellow slip through
your fingers?”

“not very ” the chief constable reassured him  “i’m having costock
shadowed—i gave instructions to the constable about it  the rest of
the whistlefield people can’t budge either  for they’ll be wanted at
the inquest to give evidence ”

“but the fellow might bolt in the meanwhile ”

“he may—assuming he’s one of the house crowd  but if he’s one of them 
he’ll have to be fairly smart  i’ve got photographs of all the ones
who were at the maze—took them under pretence of needing someone to
give the scale in the pictures  a photograph’s better than a
description  you know ”

wendover was silent for a few seconds 

“i suppose you’re going to ardsley about the poison on the darts?”

“partly that  partly to gather impressions  if you must know ”

“oh  well  he ought to be able to spot the thing for you  they say
he’s written a book on poisonology or whatever they call it ”

“toxicology is the word you’re dredging for  i think ”

“well  toxicology  then  that reminds me  do you think      ”

“never  quite against my strictest principles  to morrow i shall spend
a penny on the local paper  i shall read up what the crime expert in
it has got to say  then i shall know all about it  why should i bother
to think?”

wendover thought that he had surprised the chief constable’s subject
of speculation  in spite of the hints he had received  he persisted in
his probing 

“then you think that ardsley may be      ”

“there’s a law of libel  squire  and you’re just twittering on the
edge of it at present  i tell you bluntly that i have no definite
ideas just now  and you’ll get nothing by all this hydraulic pump
business that you’re trying  if i ever get to the bottom of this
affair  i promise you i’ll spout like an artesian well of information 
till then  the borings will show no results ”

wendover accepted the rebuff placidly  sir clinton was grateful  and
showed it by his next words 

“the fact is  squire  i’m keeping an open mind and i don’t want to be
prejudiced  it’s as clear as print that you dislike this man ardsley 
hence it wouldn’t pay me to listen to you unconsciously discrediting
him beforehand  i tell you what  we’ll discuss the thing to night when
i’ve got my mind cleared up a bit  and then you can say what you like 
but i don’t promise to give you much information  remember  i’m paid
to keep my mouth shut so long as a quiet tongue is necessary  and i’ve
got to earn my pay  you see ”

wendover’s face cleared when this point of view was put before him 

“you can’t put it fairer than that  clinton ” he admitted  “i hadn’t
looked at it quite in that light  you know ”

he said no more at the time  and soon the car reached the entrance to
the toxicologist’s grounds  at the house they learned that dr  ardsley
was at home  and they were shown into a room  he did not keep them
waiting long 

as he came forward to meet them  sir clinton saw a man of about fifty 
ardsley’s hair was silvered  and his face showed heavy lines  but his
step was light and he was obviously in perfect condition  from below
heavy eyebrows his grey eyes seemed to examine the world coldly  and
the set of his mouth was sufficient to show more than a little
toughness in the disposition which had moulded it 

sir clinton rapidly explained the cause of his visit  and producing
the box of darts  he handed one of them to the toxicologist 

“i’m not sufficiently ignorant to expect you to tell me what this
stuff is on the spur of the moment  dr  ardsley  but i’m really
trusting to luck that you may be able to make a guess at what the
thing might be  if you can do even that  it may be of great importance
to us ”

ardsley took the dart and examined it for a moment or two  then he put
questions about the state of the bodies and the times  which sir
clinton was able to furnish 

“h’m!” he said at last  “i think  from what you say  that i might make
a guess at it  it’s obviously one of these arrow poisons or something
of that sort  perhaps a strophanthus derivative or a member of the
strychnos group ”

“can you give me anything more definite?” sir clinton demanded  rather
anxiously  “time’s the main factor with me just now  i know these
vegetable things are the very devil to spot  but it’s honestly a
matter of life or death  and i want something definite if you can give
me it ”

ardsley frowned slightly as he examined the dart 

“can you spare this? i mean  to examine it  chemically—and otherwise 
i can’t promise to let you have it back intact  you know ”

“give me information  that’s all i ask ”

“very good ”

he paused for a moment 

“you won’t want to let this out of your sight  i suppose  then you’d
better come along to my laboratory  luckily i have a guinea pig in
stock ”

he glanced under his eyebrows at wendover 

“you’d rather stay here  i should think  wendover  you dislike
vivisection  i’m only going to put a needle into the little
beast—quite painless  but you needn’t come and get your feelings
rasped ”

it was phrased politely enough  but it was quite evident from the way
in which it was said that ardsley had no desire to let wendover into
his laboratory  leaving the squire to kick his heels  the toxicologist
led sir clinton through the house to the research department 

“we’d better see exactly what phenomena the poison produces  first of
all  i’ll get the guinea pig ”

he washed some of the poison from the dart with liquid  and introduced
the solution into a hypodermic syringe  by means of which he injected
a minute amount of the fluid under the guinea pig’s skin 

“dead already?” sir clinton asked in some astonishment  “it’s like a
thunderbolt ”

ardsley had been experimenting on the animal and watching closely  his
face showed that he had found something definite 

“i think i can make a guess ” he said  “it happens to be something
with which i’m fairly familiar  let’s confirm it ”

he made another extraction of the poison which he placed in a
test tube  to this he added a few drops of solution from a bottle
which he took down from a shelf 

“sulphovanadic acid ” he explained  “just watch ”

on the addition of the reagent  the liquid in the test tube turned
black 

“it ought to change to dark blue  and then to red after a time ”

“what do you make of it?” sir clinton demanded 

“curare  i’m pretty sure of it  i’ve used it a lot and i feel fairly
safe in saying that  of course  if you want me to swear to it  that’s
a different matter  this is only a rough test  i’d need to do a lot
more before i could go into the box and testify about it ”

sir clinton nodded 

“of course  i know it by name ” he said  “south american arrow poison 
isn’t it? can you tell me anything more about it?”

ardsley was engaged in writing some notes  he looked up apologetically
for a moment 

“i have to enter up details of each experiment i carry out  you know 
sir clinton—even if it’s only a case of pricking a beast with a
needle  if you don’t mind  i’ll finish this entry  i like to have
things always ship shape in that line  and the more so since i’ve got
the police on the premises ”

he smiled  not altogether pleasantly  as he turned again to his
writing  when he had finished  he suggested that they should rejoin
wendover 

“i’m not going to give you a lecture on curare ” he said  when they
had returned to the other room  “but one or two points may be of use
to you  it’s a south american arrow poison  as you said  its
physiological effect is a powerful paralysing action on the motor
nerve endings supplying striated muscle  but it has no action on the
excitability of the muscle  you saw the actual results in that
experiment ”

“i guessed something of the sort from the state of the two bodies ”
sir clinton explained  “it was pretty clear that neither of them had
struggled much before they died  i put that down to the swift action
of the poison  but from what you say  they must have been paralysed
when the stuff got into the blood stream ”

ardsley made no comment  but continued his exposition 

“it wouldn’t require a large dose to kill a man  curare contains
various alkaloids  paracurarine and protocurarine are amongst them  a
quarter of a grain of protocurarine would kill a ten stone man quite
easily  there was far more than a fatal dose of curare on that dart ”

“can you tell us anything about how the stuff comes on the market?”
sir clinton inquired 

“there are three brands of it to be had ” the toxicologist explained 
“para curare you can buy in bamboo tubes  calabash curare is packed in
gourds  and what they call pot curare is sold in earthenware pots  the
stuff’s a crude product  you understand  one specimen differs from
another to some extent  though not materially for most purposes ”

“you have some of it in stock yourself for your experiments  perhaps?”

ardsley smiled rather grimly 

“a man isn’t required to incriminate himself  is he? but i don’t mind
admitting that i have some of the stuff  you could have found that out
for yourself by examining my returns under the act  you know  so i
lose nothing by frankness ”

sir clinton acknowledged the underlying meaning of ardsley’s words by
a faint shrug of his shoulders  a completely non committal gesture 

“you practically told me you had it  there in the laboratory ” he
reminded the toxicologist  “what’s more important at present is to
know if anyone else could have had access to it ”

ardsley reflected for a moment or two before speaking again 

“there’s another source of supply close at hand ” he said  as though
the point had just come to his memory  “roger shandon had a sort of
museum up at whistlefield—stuff he had picked up on his
travels—rubbish mostly  but i remember he had a pot of curare amongst
it ”

“ah! that’s what i wanted to get at ” sir clinton broke in  “you’re
sure about that?”

“quite  it slipped my memory at the time  but i’m quite certain about
it  it’s real stuff  undoubtedly  i remember that once  a while ago  i
ran short of curare and i borrowed roger’s specimen and took some of
it  i returned it to him at once  of course  and i only took a trace
for use  but it’s real curare all right  without any doubt ”

“and that stuff’s lying up at whistlefield now? is it under lock and
key?”

“no ” ardsley explained  “it’s just lying loose in an open
museum case  anyone could lay their hands on it ”

sir clinton’s face showed perplexity 

“it’s time that we’re up against ” he repeated  and he seemed to be
making some unsatisfactory calculation  “i wish i’d known about that
stuff an hour ago ”

he turned to wendover 

“look here  you must do this for me  i’ve other things to attend to
which must be put through immediately  will you take dr  ardsley up in
your car to whistlefield? he’ll identify the pot of curare for you 
you couldn’t be sure of it yourself  and then take charge of it  quote
me  if anyone raises objections  and make a note of who objects  if
anyone does  now it’s a matter of hurry  and more hurry  you must get
that stuff into your hands without a second’s delay  wendover ”

the toxicologist wasted no time 

“i’ll get my coat now ” he said  going towards the door 

“we must stop any chance of further supplies at once  just in case of
more trouble ” sir clinton said  when their host had left the room 

wendover was plainly astonished 

“do you expect another crime? surely two’s enough?”

“one never knows ” sir clinton affirmed  with a hint of trouble in his
tone  “i’d never forgive myself if i neglected the possibility—even
though it’s a very remote one  one can’t bring dead men back to life
with a few regrets  you know ”

ardsley put his head in at the door 

“i’m ready ”

“then let’s get off ” said sir clinton  “drop me in the village as we
pass  wendover  i’ve something to do there  i’ll join you at
whistlefield as quick as i can  wait for me there  now drive for all
you’re worth ”

as they came into the village  sir clinton gave a sigh of relief 

“shops still open  i see  that’s all right!”

he got down from the car 

“now  off you go  don’t waste a moment!”

as the car moved off  the chief constable glanced along the street and
then  with deliberate restraint  he lounged over to the door of the
local ironmonger  all traces of hurry had disappeared  he seemed
merely a casual purchaser 

“good evening ” he said pleasantly to the man behind the counter  “you
seem to stock a fairly wide selection of things  to judge by your
window  i’m looking for a small drill  if you have one on the
premises  could you let me see one or two?”

the ironmonger  it seemed  kept such things in stock 

sir clinton examined them 

“this seems to be what i want ” he said at last  “have you a brace to
fit it?”

he fitted the drill to the brace  took out a penny and tried the
drill  then  with the hole half bored  he seemed to lose interest in
the matter 

“you don’t stock air gun slugs  do you?”

“as a matter of fact  we do  sir  mr  hawkhurst of whistlefield uses a
lot of them  and he persuaded me to keep a stock of them  nobody else
has any need for them  but he buys quite a lot from time to time ”

“perhaps you keep darts  too?”

“yes  i’ve got some in stock ”

sir clinton considered for a moment 

“let’s see  i’ll take a hundred slugs and a couple of dozen darts  you
might put the whole lot in one parcel—i’ll take the brace and drill as
well ”

while the man was packing up the articles  sir clinton made inquiries
as to the position of the druggist’s shop in the village  and on
leaving the ironmonger’s he made his way to it 

“let’s see ” he reflected aloud  after he had had a few words with the
druggist on local gossip  “i’ll have a pennyworth of condy’s fluid
crystals  they’re a good antiseptic  aren’t they? and about threepence
worth of some carbolic solution  too  have you any litmus  by any
chance—the solid stuff is what i want ”

it happened that the druggist had all these in stock 

“that will be all to night  sir?” he inquired  as sir clinton took the
packets and paid for his purchases 

“that will be all for the present ” said the chief constable
absent mindedly  and he left the shop after saying good evening 

he made his way to the police station  where the sergeant in charge 
recognising him  came forward at once 

“have you a room here that i can have to myself for ten minutes or so 
sergeant?”

“yes  sir clinton  this way ”

“this will do all right ” the chief constable said  after a glance at
the place  “by the way  sergeant  send a man out at once to get me a
small table vice—you know these portable things—at the ironmonger’s  i
saw one in the window as i passed  and wait a moment—can you smoke
navy cut? good  then get a couple of small tins as well ”

considerably mystified  the sergeant executed his orders  and when the
various articles had been procured  sir clinton closed the door behind
him and set to work  his task took him rather longer than he expected 
but at last it was done to his satisfaction  he called his subordinate
in again 

“a glass of water  sergeant  if you please ”

when this was brought  he shut the door again  some minutes later he
came out and called the sergeant 

“here’s your navy cut  sergeant  i’m sorry i can’t give you the tins ”

the sergeant  completely at a loss to understand these proceedings 
thanked him in a dazed fashion and began to sweep the tobacco from the
table into his pouch 

“how far is it to whistlefield?” sir clinton inquired 

on learning the distance he borrowed a bicycle from one of the
constables 

“send up to whistlefield for it to morrow—or in an hour  if you like 
i’ll leave word that you’re to get it ”

and with that the chief constable mounted the machine and rode off 
the sergeant watched him out of sight and then returned into the
police station  he entered the room which sir clinton had been using
and looked at the debris of the unknown experiment 

“he’s had something clipped in that vice  i suppose  and there’s a
drill  i wonder where he picked that up  and he’s got some pinky stuff
in that glass of water  too  and he takes away the tins and he leaves
the tobacco to me  this is a rum kind of chief constable to have  for
sure  what’s he getting at?”



chapter vii 

the pot of curare

after leaving the chief constable in the village  wendover took the
road to whistlefield  sir clinton’s obvious anxiety had impressed him 
and he drove fast  he was not altogether pleased at having ardsley
thrust upon him as a companion  for he disliked the toxicologist 
whenever he saw ardsley’s grim  clean shaven face he had a vision of
tortured animals  and a spasm of repugnance attacked him  his
knowledge of the vivisection act was negligible  and his imagination
pictured helpless beasts strapped to tables and writhing under the
knife of the vivisector  for politeness’ sake  he forced himself to
make conversation 

“it’s to be hoped we can manage this for driffield without a hitch ”
he said  “he seems to be afraid of leaving the stuff lying loose  you
can find it all right  i suppose?”

“i can go straight to the place where it used to be kept ” ardsley
assured him coldly  paying no attention to the speculative part of
wendover’s speech 

he seemed to feel no desire to continue the conversation  and wendover
felt that he had suffered a snub 

“surly devil!” he commented inwardly  “he won’t even meet one
half way ”

he had no time to brood over the matter  however  for very soon they
reached whistlefield 

“you’d better do the talking ” ardsley advised  as they got out of the
car and approached the door of the house  wendover nodded in agreement
and rang the bell  when the maid appeared he asked if ernest shandon
was disengaged  the maid seemed doubtful 

“he’s in the study  sir  and he left word that he wasn’t to be
disturbed ”

wendover thought of asking for the secretary  but it struck him that
since they had come to commandeer the drug  it would be best to see
one of the family  after all  it was private property  even if it was
dangerous stuff 

“is mr  hawkhurst at home?”

the maid showed them into a room and asked them to wait until she
could find him 

“if he isn’t  then ask miss hawkhurst to see us for a moment if she
can ” wendover directed 

in a few moments  arthur hawkhurst entered the room  looking rather
surprised when he saw who his two visitors were 

“fairly travelling round and seeing the country  aren’t you  wendover?
morbid curiosity  i think  haunting the scene of crime like this ”

he nodded to ardsley  quite obviously the double murder had not
affected his spirits to any extent  wendover was not much surprised 
the boy had never been a favourite with either of his uncles  and
though he seemed lacking in decent respect for the victims  wendover
put it down to arthur’s slightly unbalanced mentality 

“i’d have preferred a shade less cheeriness  i must say ” he thought
to himself  “but i suppose it would have been mere hypocrisy in his
case  and one must make some allowance for his brain being a bit
abnormal just now ”

he came to the point at once 

“we’ve been sent up by sir clinton driffield to see if something is in
that museum of your uncle’s  he wants to know if it’s been removed by
any chance ”

“what the devil does he know about the museum?” demanded arthur  “he
never saw it when he was here in the afternoon  what does he want with
it anyway? and what is it that he does want? does he think one of the
blokes upstairs had offended one of the mayan idols and got a settler
by way of squaring the account?”

“no ” wendover said  hastily  “nothing of that sort ”

“well  what is it then? i’ll get it for you ”

“don’t trouble  please  dr  ardsley knows the look of it and it will
be easiest for us to go to the museum and look round ourselves ”

“oh  indeed!” arthur grew distinctly hostile  “you seem to take a good
deal on yourselves  why not wait till you’re asked  before wandering
about in people’s houses?”

wendover felt that the matter was becoming awkward  the boy seemed to
have flown into a passion  one of these storms of emotion to which he
had been subject since his illness  and then another thought crossed
wendover’s mind  though he tried to dismiss it  why should arthur be
so anxious to prevent them entering the museum? curare had not been
mentioned  surely young hawkhurst could have no suspicion of what they
wanted  and yet he seemed determined to put difficulties in the way 
it was with great relief that he saw sylvia come into the room  after
greeting her  he turned away from arthur and explained the matter to
the girl 

“of course  come along at once ” she invited them  ignoring arthur’s
lowering face  “anything we can do to clear up this miserable affair
ought to be done ”

she led them through the house to the museum  it was  as ardsley had
said  mainly filled with rubbish—odds and ends which might possibly
call up recollections in the mind which had gathered the stuff  but of
very little interest to a casual visitor  it was a miscellany of
souvenirs rather than a museum  and the items seemed to be lying on
the shelves without any system whatever 

ardsley evidently knew exactly where to go  leaving the others  he
moved across to one of the cases on the wall  opened it  and took down
from a shelf a little pot of unbaked earthenware 

arthur had followed him suspiciously 

“what’s that you’re doing?” he demanded  abruptly 

“the chief constable asked me to find this for him ” ardsley replied 
examining the material in the pot as he spoke 

“you’re not taking any of it  are you?”

young hawkhurst put the question with obvious distrust  he had his
eyes fixed on the toxicologist’s hands  as though he feared that
ardsley might remove some of the stuff under their very eyes 

“no ” ardsley retorted  with a certain sharpness in his tone  “i’ve
nothing further to do with it ”

he handed the little vessel to wendover as he spoke  and seemed to
dissociate himself from any further connection with the matter 
arthur’s eyes fixed themselves on the pot  he was still  apparently 
disturbed by the way things were going 

“i don’t care about this way of doing things ” he complained  “here
you come along  for all we know you’ve no authority whatever behind
you  and you go straight to this stuff and want to take it away with
you  by the look of it  i know what it is  it’s curare—indian
arrow poison  and you propose calmly to walk off with it! we can’t
have that sort of thing  it’s dangerous stuff  you’ve no right to take
it  i object ”

wendover tried to throw oil on the waters 

“we aren’t going to take it away ” he explained  turning to sylvia 
“sir clinton asked us to pick it out—that’s all  he’ll be here shortly
and you can learn from himself what he intends to do  but in any case 
i think it ought to be in a safer place than this  as you say”—he
turned again to arthur—“it’s dangerous stuff ”

sylvia agreed immediately 

“it was rather careless to leave it about like that if it’s
poisonous ” she confirmed 

wendover’s mind had been busy in the meanwhile  he had noted for sir
clinton’s benefit that arthur evidently knew the nature of the stuff 
although there was no label on the specimen  if arthur knew  then the
chances were that other people knew also  he glanced at the contents
of the pot in his hand  and he thought he could detect that some of
the stuff had been removed  the original surface seemed to have been
disturbed  then he remembered that ardsley had volunteered an account
of how he had run short of curare and had taken some of roger’s
specimen  that might account for the disturbance  another thought
occurred to him  and he asked permission to inspect the museum 

“do you mind if i look round the shelves?” he asked sylvia  “i’ve
never been in this place before  you know  your uncle seems to have
collected a lot of specimens ”

sylvia accompanied him in his tour of inspection  but she could throw
little light on the various objects 

“hardly anything’s labelled  as you see ” she pointed out 

“once or twice i offered to label them all for uncle roger  for it
seems so silly to have a lot of things there with no explanation 
doesn’t it?”

they moved down the room  scanning the shelves  ardsley remained near
the door  grimly aloof from the rest of the group  arthur hovered
uncertainly about the room  evidently keeping his eye on the visitors
as though troubled by suspicions of their motives 

“this is a dreadful business about my uncles ” sylvia said in a low
voice  when she and wendover had moved away from the others  “i was
terribly shocked when i got back here and heard what had happened  i’m
not going to pretend i was very fond of either of them—they always
seemed to me different from the rest of us  somehow—but i liked them
in a way  and it was horrible to come back and find that while i’d
been enjoying myself in the afternoon  they’d been      ”

she hesitated  evidently disliking the word—“murdered ”

wendover nodded understandingly  he quite appreciated her feelings 
neither of the dead men had been of the type that would attract the
admiration or even the respect of a girl like sylvia  their
disappearance would leave no real gap in her world  but after all 
they were relations of hers and the sudden incursion of violence and
death into her family was bound to leave its impression 

“you’re not frightened  are you?” he asked 

“no  of course not  but it seems a frightful affair  doesn’t it? it
leaves one dazed  somehow—like a bad dream  only one doesn’t wake up 
we all seem to be going about trying to persuade ourselves that the
world’s just the same as ever  but somehow i don’t seem to succeed 
it’s too horrible for that ”

wendover did his best to soothe her  behind the pretence of
indifference he could see that she was badly shaken  quite obviously
she was trying to minimise her feelings so as not to make him
uncomfortable  they continued their tour of the collection  and she
tried to interest herself in explaining to him the various objects in
it 

when they had completed their inspection  wendover suppressed a sigh
of relief 

“well ” he said to himself  “there are no poisoned arrows there  at
any rate  this pot of stuff seems to be the only danger point in the
whole lot ”

he bent his efforts to infusing at least a semblance of harmony into
the company  but it was not a very successful attempt  sylvia seconded
him to the best of her ability  but arthur still maintained his
suspicious attitude  and ardsley seemed disinclined to emerge from his
state of unfriendly neutrality  it was a relief to them all when the
door of the museum opened and ernest shandon ushered in the chief
constable  stenness followed close on their heels 

“this is sir clinton driffield  miss hawkhurst ” wendover hastened to
say  when he remembered that they had not met in the afternoon  sir
clinton bowed to the girl and then  with a word of apology  he turned
to wendover 

“got the stuff?” he demanded  and his face cleared when wendover held
up the little earthenware pot  a glance at ardsley confirmed that it
was the right thing  and sir clinton seemed to pay no further
attention to it at the moment 

“i’m afraid i disturbed your uncle  miss hawkhurst  he was busy in the
study  and i was rather loath to interrupt him  but he very kindly
came out at once ”

ernest  in the background  fumbled for a moment with his eyeglasses 

“i was very busy ” he admitted  “but of course i wasn’t so busy that i
couldn’t stop  in fact  i was just turning over papers and going
through the safe with stenness  it wasn’t really important  or at
least not so important that it couldn’t be put aside for a time  and
sir clinton said he wasn’t going to stay more than a few minutes  so i
just left things  of course  i’d just been looking over roger’s will 
we happened to come across it on the top of a pile of things in the
safe  i couldn’t understand it—to tell you the truth  these lawyers
are terrible fellows for putting in long words—like ‘hereinafter’ and
‘heritable’ and ‘moveable’ and ‘accretion ’ and so on  and all about
‘survivor or survivors’ and ‘beneficiaries’ and a lot of complicated
things besides  if it hadn’t been for stenness i don’t think i could
have made out what it was all about ”

he blinked helplessly at the group  and then continued with a tinge of
pride in his tone 

“roger made me one of his trustees  neville was another of them  and
there’s a third  the head of his firm of lawyers  i think  or at any
rate  a lawyer ”

then  in a rather discouraged voice 

“i suppose that’ll mean a lot of bother—signing papers and all that
sort of thing ”

sir clinton waited patiently for the end of ernest’s speech  and then
he came to the point at once 

“if you’re an executor that simplifies matters  mr  shandon  i want to
take away this article here”—he indicated the pot in wendover’s
hand—“but only for a day or two  probably  you’ll get it back again in
due course  it’s only a loan  you understand ”

ernest evidently felt the dignity of his new position  he put out his
hand for the pot  examined it carefully through his glasses  then
handed it over to sir clinton  though with a certain reluctance 

“have i any right to part with it  stenness? you know what the will
says ”

“there’s no reason why you shouldn’t  mr  shandon ” the secretary
reassured him  “besides  if the chief constable wants it in connection
with this afternoon’s affair”—he glanced interrogatively at sir
clinton—“i’ve no doubt he could get power to take it  whether you want
to give it up or not ”

ernest seemed to feel that he had got into deeper waters than he cared
about 

“well  if stenness says that  i suppose it’s all right  he understood
the will and he ought to know  he explained it all to me very
carefully just a few minutes ago  so he knows what’s what  i could
understand him all right  why can’t lawyers use plain language like
stenness  instead of wrapping it all up in ‘hereinafters’ and
‘aforesaids’? it’s a stupid sort of way to write  i can’t think what
they do it for ”

rather to wendover’s surprise  sir clinton showed no great eagerness
to be gone  he pulled from his pocket the tin box which had been found
in the maze and slowly removed the cover 

“you’re an expert with air guns  i think  mr  hawkhurst?” he asked
pleasantly  as though appealing to an authority  “would you mind
having a look at these things and telling me what you make of them?
don’t touch the points ” he added quickly  “they’re very dangerous ”

arthur hawkhurst had been listening with a frown to sir clinton’s
negotiations for the pot of curare  but he seemed to be flattered by
the chief constable’s direct appeal to him  he came forward  took the
box in his hand  and examined the contents minutely 

“may i take one out to look at it?”

“of course—but be careful ” sir clinton agreed 

arthur removed one of the darts and inspected it 

“they seem to be just ordinary pattern air gun darts  they’d fit any
of the guns we have  but someone seems to have been monkeying with
them—boring holes in them and filling them up with some dirt or other 
and the feathering’s all filthy  too ”

he completed his examination and handed the box back to sir clinton 

“anybody else claim to be an expert?” asked the chief constable 

sylvia looked at the tiny missiles with a shudder 

“they’re just ordinary darts so far as i can see ” she said  “and was
it one of these things that killed my uncles? they seem such harmless
little things  i’ve fired them often and often at targets myself  one
would never dream they could be deadly ”

sir clinton closed the box and put it down on the mantel piece behind
him  he seemed suddenly to have been struck by a fresh idea 

“you said ‘any of the guns we have ’ mr  hawkhurst  i’d like to know
how many air guns you have on the premises ”

arthur looked at him distrustfully 

“i can’t tell you on the spot ” he admitted  grudgingly  “we have half
a dozen that i could lay my hands on  but we’ve got more than that
lying about somewhere or other  they get left in odd places  the
gardeners sometimes use them for shooting rats for amusement and so
on  and one never knows where the guns are till one asks for them ”

sir clinton seemed rather taken aback 

“you seem to have a regular armoury ” he said 

“i’m keen on air guns ” arthur explained  “you’re not going to take
 them  away  are you?”

sir clinton waved the suggestion aside at once 

“of course not  i only asked out of curiosity  i knew you were
interested ”

arthur seemed to be relieved by this 

“oh  that’s all right ” he said in a much more cordial tone  “so long
as you leave me one of them  it’ll do all i want ”

“now  dr  ardsley  if you’ll just show me where this pot used to
stand  i think we shall be able to go ” sir clinton said  turning to
another matter and dismissing the air gun question 

at this  ernest came forward 

“i think i can show you where it stood ” he volunteered  “i remember
roger bringing it back from south africa  he used to keep it on a
shelf in his study in his last house  i remember  the third shelf from
the top  to the right of the door  then when he came here  he had such
a lot of stuff that he’d collected that he found he’d got to make a
museum of it  so he put it all together in this room  i’ve been over
it all with him—i helped him to arrange it  i remember  but it seemed
to me very dull  not a bit interesting  but  of course  if you like  i
could show it to you and tell you all about it  perhaps it might
interest you  though i found it dull  people’s tastes differ so much 
one never can tell  can one?”

ardsley had paid no attention to ernest’s flood of information  he had
gone down to the proper shelf and now he pointed out the empty space
to sir clinton  the chief constable examined the place carefully  but
said nothing 

at length he went to the windows of the room and inspected the
catches 

“anyone could have got in here without much trouble ” he commented 
“you don’t seem much afraid of burglars  mr  shandon ”

“no ” ernest admitted  refixing his eyeglasses with care and looking
wisely at the window fastenings  “you see  we’ve never had any
burglary here  it may seem strange  for of course whistlefield’s a bit
isolated and it might be a good place to burgle  i never burgled
myself  you know  so i don’t really know about these things  there’s a
lot of silver  of course ” he added  “perhaps it is strange that we
never had a burglary  now i come to think of it  it would be quite an
easy house to get into  we ought to have burglar alarms put on 
really  things are an awful bother  can you recommend a good
burglar alarm  sir clinton?”

the chief constable deprecated the proposed task with a smile 

“really  mr  shandon  i’ve had no particular experience  you’d better
have a look at a few and choose the one you think most satisfactory ”

ernest’s face expressed as clearly as print his inward comment  “more
trouble!”

“i don’t know  sir clinton  perhaps i’d better get some  but then  you
know ” he added with a touch of relief  “we’ve never had a burglary
yet  hardly worth while fitting alarms  perhaps  it’s such a nuisance
getting the things  and then getting workmen up to fit them—turn the
whole place upside down and all that—and then having to remember to
set them at night before one goes to bed  you don’t think it’s worth
while  do you?” he ended  hopefully 

sir clinton shook his head 

“you’re in charge now  mr  shandon  you know  you must do what you
think best yourself ”

he turned to ardsley and wendover 

“i think we must be getting on the road again ”

they took their leave and got into wendover’s car again 

“we’ll drop you at your house ” said sir clinton to the toxicologist 
“it was very good of you to take all this trouble to help us  i feel a
good deal easier in my mind now that i’ve got this ”

he tapped the little jar of curare which he had brought away with him 



chapter viii 

opportunity  method  and motive

wendover picked up the decanter and poured out some whiskey for his
guest 

“you can’t complain that i’ve worried you with questions  clinton  but
i think you might tell me something about this business at the maze 
you seem to have definite ideas  and i’d like to know what they are ”

he glanced at the tumbler as he spoke  then added 

“‘ in vino veritas  ’ you know ”

sir clinton looked up with a quizzical expression on his face 

“truth at the bottom of the decanter  eh?” he inquired  “well  if
that’s the method you can give me just two fingers and all the soda 
the truth’s sometimes dangerous when it’s undiluted  and  remember  i
warned you frankly that it might not be convenient to tell you very
much just at present  the arrangement was that you were to give your
views and i was to say what i thought of them ”

wendover acknowledged the accuracy of this 

“at least you might give me something in the way of general
principles  though  they aren’t hush hush matters  at any rate ”

sir clinton came over  lifted his tumbler  and went back again to his
seat before replying 

“that’s true enough ” he admitted  “but i don’t think general
principles are likely to take you far in this case  i can make you a
present of them without giving much away ”

wendover poured out his own whiskey and soda and returned to his
chair 

“go on ” he said  “make a lecture of it  if you like  the night’s
still young ”

“i’ve a good mind to take you at your word  and you’ll have only
yourself to thank if it bores you  to begin with  then  there are
three basic points on which a prosecutor has to satisfy the judge—or
the jury  if it’s a jury case  these are  opportunity  method  and
motive  it isn’t absolutely necessary to prove motive  but one does
what one can to establish it if possible  a jury might be chary of
convicting unless they saw something of the sort ”

“you might expand that a bit ” wendover suggested  “all you’ve given
me is three words ”

“take them one by one ” sir clinton went on  “first of all 
opportunity  the accused man must be somebody who had a real chance of
committing the crime—somebody who isn’t excluded by ordinary physical
impossibilities  if a body with its throat freshly cut were to fall
into this room at the present moment  it would be no use trying to
bring a case against the mikado or the president of the united states 
we know that they’re thousands of miles away at this time  it would be
physically impossible for them to have done the trick ”

“that’s self evident ” said wendover  “a murderer’s bound to have been
on the spot when he committed his murder ”

“not necessarily ” sir clinton contradicted at once  “a poisoner
needn’t be near his victim when the victim dies  he might have sent
poisoned chocolates by post or something like that  but he must have
had the opportunity of committing the crime  whether he was on the
spot or not  you couldn’t have accused robinson crusoe in a poisoned
chocolates case  he was outside the postal radius ”

wendover nodded in agreement 

“but in this particular case at the maze ” he commented  “it’s pretty
plain that the murderer was on the spot all right  the person who
killed the shandons was somebody who was in or near the maze between
three and four o’clock this afternoon ”

sir clinton passed to his second point 

“method is the next thing  it’s an axiom that the more ordinary the
method of killing is  the more difficult it is to spot the murderer 
suppose you find a body in a by street and it turns out that the man
has been stabbed to death  what have you to go on? not much  but if
you find somebody poisoned with some fairly out of the way alkaloid 
then you limit the number of possible murderers very considerably  you
remember the crippen case  divergence from the normal is the weakest
link in a murderer’s chainmail ”

“well  you ought to be happy in this affair  you’ve got a sufficiently
out of the way method ”

“that’s so ” sir clinton admitted  “but what you gain on the swings
you sometimes lose on the roundabouts  you know  the method in this
case was one that either a man or a woman could have used  even a
child can pull a trigger  that extends the range a bit ”

“but a child would need to have had the chance of getting at the
curare ”

“and the curare has been lying open to anyone for the last year or
two  don’t forget that ”

“then you think it was the stuff up at the house that was used?”

“i don’t think anything about it at present  all i wanted was to shut
off that possible source of supply ”

“then you must be expecting more murders?”

sir clinton appeared not to hear the query 

“suppose we come to motives now  barring very exceptional cases  there
are really only five motives that make it worth while to commit
murder  women  money  revenge  fear  and homicidal mania  and i should
think that in most cases if you go deep enough you’d find either women
or money at the back of the business ”

wendover reflected for a time  evidently conning over the
possibilities 

“it doesn’t seem to be women this time  so far as things have gone ”
he suggested at last 

sir clinton refused to be drawn 

“i must confess ” he said  “that i have a sneaking admiration for the
shandons’ murderer—at least so far as his brains go  could you imagine
a better place for murder than the maze? absolute privacy guaranteed
by the nature of the affair  no one could see through those hedges 
the murderer can creep up to within lethal distance  come almost face
to face with his victim  and yet remain absolutely invisible  and when
the job’s done  he can sneak off in perfect safety  no one can swear
to seeing him  if he’s found in the maze  he can explain that he heard
a cry for help and rushed to assist  it was a brainy lad who hit on
that  locale  for his crime ”

wendover thought he had put his finger on a weak spot 

“but that limits the number of possible murderers still further 
surely  it would need to be a fellow who knew the maze intimately 
otherwise he’d have got tied up in it ”

sir clinton smiled a trifle derisively 

“didn’t you hear me inquire about that at whistlefield? the maze is
open day and night  anyone could learn all about it  and no one would
be much the wiser  since it’s in an outlying part of the grounds  a
man could come up the river in a boat  drop into it  and cut a whole
series of private marks on the hedges to guide him to the centre—bend
twigs or something like that  which wouldn’t give away the fact that
he’d been at work  or he could even bring in a thread and trail it
behind him to help him out again  and roll it up as he retreated  no 
you can’t bank much on that point  squire ”

“well  who did it  then?” demanded wendover  exasperated by the
upsetting of his idea 

sir clinton looked up with something suspiciously like a grin on his
face 

“it might have been anybody ” he said  oracularly  “but it seems more
likely that it was somebody  if you catch my meaning ”

wendover betrayed no pique at this indirect discomfiture 

“one doesn’t get much out of you  that’s clear ” he responded
ruefully 

sir clinton seemed to feel that he might say something further without
breaking through his self imposed limitations 

“what’s wrong with your outlook on the business  squire  is that you
want to treat a real crime as if it were a bit clipped out of a
detective novel  in a ’tec yarn  you get everything nicely sifted for
you  the author puts down only things that are relevant to the story 
if he didn’t select his materials  his book would be far too long and
no one would have the patience to plough through it  the result is
that the important clues are thrown up as if they had a spotlight on
them  if the reader happens to have any intelligence ”

he paused to light a cigarette before he continued 

“in real life ” he went on  “there isn’t any of this kind of
simplification  you get a mass of stuff thrown at your head in the way
of evidence  and in the end nine tenths of it usually turns out to be
completely irrelevant  you’ve got to sift the grain from the chaff
yourself  with no author to do the rough work for you  do you remember
the map game?”

wendover shook his head 

“i don’t recognise it from the title ”

“you must have played it sometime or other when you were a kid ” sir
clinton continued  “one player chooses a name on a map  the other
player’s got to find out which name it is  he can ask any questions he
likes  provided that the first player can answer them by a plain ‘yes’
or a ‘no ’ now that game is something like detective work  though the
problem’s much easier to solve  curiously enough  the really clever
player doesn’t choose a name in tiny type—only the beginner does that 
the expert picks out some name like france  or germany  or
czecho slovakia—something that stretches half way across the map  then
when the opponent asks  ‘is it on this half of the map?’ the expert
answers ‘no ’ quite truthfully  and the beginner at once assumes that
it must be in the other half and proceeds accordingly  quite
forgetting that it may be on both halves simultaneously  that’s the
kind of thing that may turn up in criminal hunting  the fellow you’re
after may be—in fact he generally is—playing two parts simultaneously 
he’s not only a criminal  he’s a normal member of society as well—at
least in murder cases he usually is  he stretches over both halves of
the map  you see? and if you insist on looking at one half only  you
miss him completely ”

“that’s a long suit of talk you had in your hand ” wendover commented 
“you seem very flush of information on some points ”

sir clinton laughed  admitting the hit 

“you asked for a lecture  and now it seems you don’t care for it when
you get it  well  try your hand yourself  let’s hear what you’ve made
of the case  i’m not afraid of prejudice now ”

wendover glanced at his friend with some suspicion  but he seemed
reassured by what he saw  sir clinton appeared to be quite anxious to
hear his ideas 

“if you’re not pulling my leg  i don’t mind ” he said  “i’ve taken in
most of what you said  and that limits things down a good deal  i’ll
take the possibles  one by one  and consider them  the bother is that
it’s difficult to find any one person who will fit into your three
classes—i mean someone who had an opportunity  the method  and a
motive strong enough ”

sir clinton knocked the ash from his cigarette 

“go on ” he said  “let’s see how you get round that snag  i’ll
represent a jury of average intelligence  if i can screw myself up to
that pitch ”

“well  first of all ” wendover suggested  “there’s this hackleton case
looming in the background  now that neville shandon’s done for 
hackleton stands to win  it was a fight between them  shandon was
depending more on his brains than on his witnesses  i take it  and now
that he’s out of it hackleton will get off scot free  there’s your
motive all right ”

sir clinton nodded his assent to this  and wendover continued with
rather more confidence 

“the method used was obviously a sound one  no matter where the murder
was done  an air gun’s fairly silent  and that curare evidently kills
quickly  it’s not the sort of thing an ordinary rough would think of 
even if he did think of it he couldn’t get the poison  but hackleton’s
got money enough to buy some unscrupulous fellow with brains  and this
gone under intellectual might have hit on the trick  or hackleton
himself may have devised it and passed it on to his tool ”

“that’s so  and then?”

“the fact that the murder was done in the maze may have been mere
accident  they may have intended to get at neville shandon anywhere
they could  and it just happened that he went into the maze and gave
them the best chance there ”

“you assume  of course  that they would have got up the topography of
the estate  maze included  beforehand?”

“i’d have done so myself if i’d been put to that job  so i suppose
they’d have had enough sense to do it  too ”

“but why was it a double murder  then?” demanded sir clinton  “how did
roger come into the business?”

wendover pondered for a moment  then he seemed to see a solution 

“perhaps they had two murderers at work and each of them imagined he’d
got the right man in front of him  the two shandons were very much
alike  you know ”

sir clinton nodded without committing himself 

“pass along to the next caravan! what’s the next animal on show in
your menagerie?”

“i’m a bit doubtful about young hawkhurst  to tell you the truth  i
hardly like to think that he did it  and yet after that attack of
sleepy sickness he certainly did turn very queer in his temper  you’d
have seen a fine outburst if you’d been with us when we went up for
the curare  and there’s no disguising the fact that he and roger
didn’t get on together at all  given an unbalanced mind and that state
of affairs  one has to admit that queer results might turn up ”

“what do you make of the opportunity factor in his case?”

“all we have is his own word that he was up at the spinney shooting
rabbits  for all we know  he may have been in the maze  he knows it
thoroughly  all the family do  of course ”

he thought in silence for a moment or two  then added 

“and of course he’s very keen on air guns  and he knew of the store of
curare in the house ”

“you’ve made out quite a fair case against both hackleton and young
hawkhurst  as suspects   squire  but there isn’t a tittle of evidence
there that a jury would look at  you know ”

“oh  i see that well enough ” wendover admitted  “but the case against
other people isn’t half as strong  ardsley’s a possible suspect  he
has possession of curare  he knows the maze intimately       ”

“and he’s had a squabble with roger shandon over some trifling fishing
rights  i’m afraid even izaak walton would hardly have thought the
matter was a sufficient ground for murder  squire ”

wendover could think of no reply to this on the spur of the moment 
and to cover his defeat he hurried on to a fresh group of suspects 

“now we come to the people who were actually in the maze at the time
of the murder or whom we know to have been in it immediately
afterwards  torrance  miss forrest  and that fellow costock  your
i d b  friend  i can’t see how miss forrest had anything to do with
it  as to costock  you know about him and i don’t ”

“yes ” said sir clinton  “i know all about costock ”

but he volunteered no further information and waited for wendover to
proceed 

“that leaves torrance  then  it’s as plain as print that torrance
might have been the murderer  he was in the maze at the time  he
arranged to part from the girl at the entrance  he’s had plenty of
time to learn the maze while he’s been down here at whistlefield  he
might have been the person vera forrest heard running in the maze just
after the murder—quite easily ”

“he didn’t take an air gun into the maze with him ” sir clinton
objected 

wendover had his answer ready this time 

“no  but he might have had it hidden there beforehand ”

“and no air gun was found afterwards ”

“he may have chucked it on to the top of one of the hedges  your
constables couldn’t have spotted it there without ladders ”

“that’s quite true ” said sir clinton  “well?”

wendover seemed to have a flash of illumination  his face lit up 

“now i see what you meant by your map analogy! of course  the snag is
that on the face of it young torrance had no motive  but suppose he
was hackleton’s tool? suppose he was in the pay of hackleton to do
this job for him? then it would all fit in  but it’ll be the devil of
a business to prove it  if it is true ”

glancing across at his friend he detected a peculiar expression on sir
clinton’s face  it was only a fleeting one  for almost immediately the
chief constable resumed his normal mask 

“go on ” he said again 

wendover had to confess that he had reached the end of his list 

“there’s nobody else that i can think of  sylvia hawkhurst was paying
a visit to some people in the afternoon and didn’t get home till it
was all over  ernest shandon was off the premises  too  probably
sitting by the roadside and cursing the nail in his boot at the very
time his brothers were being murdered  and then there’s stenness  he
was up at the house when the affair took place  miss forrest found him
there when she went to give the alarm ”

“stenness ” said sir clinton reflectively  “stenness is a very
efficient fellow ”

wendover thought he detected something behind the phrase 

“what do you think?” he demanded 

sir clinton looked at him mildly 

“i think it’s about time we were going to bed  squire  we may have to
be up early to morrow  at least  i may ”



chapter ix 

the burglary at whistlefield

when sir clinton came down to breakfast on the following morning 
wendover thought that he looked tired and worried  though he was doing
his best to show his normal composure 

“you look as if you’d been up all night  clinton  and yet you cleared
me off to bed fairly early ”

the chief constable forced a smile  but it was obvious that he had
something on his mind which was troubling him 

“not  all  night ” he said  qualifying wendover’s suggestion by a
slight emphasis  “but i’ve certainly lost a good deal of sleep over
this whistlefield business ”

“i can’t see what you’ve got to worry about just now ” his host
retorted  “until one gets more evidence than we have just now  there’s
nothing that can be done  so far as i can see  you practically
admitted as much yourself  last night ”

“last night and this morning are two different things ” sir clinton
pointed out  rather gloomily  “a lot may happen in six hours ”

“well  if they have happened  they have happened  and you couldn’t
have prevented them happening ”

“that sounds like a truism ” the chief constable commented  “and i
wish it were one  but it isn’t ”

he seemed almost on the verge of a confidence at last  but to
wendover’s disappointment he contented himself with adding 

“i’ve taken a big risk in this affair  squire  and if the game goes
against me  i’d never be able to forgive myself  it’s as serious as
that ”

from his tone  it was evident that he was gravely perturbed  and
wendover could find nothing to say which seemed likely to be helpful 

in a moment or two  sir clinton broke the silence 

“they’re on the ’phone at whistlefield  aren’t they?”

“yes  are you expecting a message?”

“one never can tell ” was all that sir clinton would vouchsafe  “can
you hear your telephone bell from this room?”

“oh  yes  the machine’s just down the passage from here  as it
happens ”

sir clinton went on with his breakfast  but wendover could see that he
was listening for the ringing of the bell  just as they had finished 
it rang sharply 

“i’ll go ” said sir clinton  “it’s almost certain to be whistlefield
ringing up ”

as he rose from the table wendover could see a look of acute anxiety
on his face  he left the door open as he went out  and the sound of
his voice at the telephone came back into the room 

“driffield speaking       did you say burglar or burglars?       all
right  don’t bother to tell me any more now  i’m coming across at
once  good bye ”

sir clinton came back to wendover  the anxiety on his face was as
deeply marked as ever  but the prospect of action seemed to have
raised his spirits slightly 

“come on  wendover  get the car out  will you? there’s been a burglary
at whistlefield last night  i’ll need to go across and look into the
affair ”

when they reached whistlefield  they were shown into the study where
they found ernest shandon and stenness waiting for them 

“now you might give me the whole story  mr  shandon ” sir clinton
requested as soon as he had greeted the two  “it may be a case where
time means a good deal  and we want to get our hands on these fellows
at once  if we can ”

ernest pulled out his cigarette case  he seemed to be in a very
nervous condition 

“d’you mind if i smoke?” he demanded  perfunctorily  “it soothes one 
i always think  gives you a better chance of putting things calmly and
not getting mixed up in your story ”

he peered thoughtfully into his case for a second or two before he
could make up his mind which cigarette to take  but at last he found
one to his mind and set it alight  wendover fidgeted slightly  but sir
clinton evidently recognised the uselessness of trying to hasten
ernest in his operations 

“there’s been a burglary here last night ” he announced at last  “or
rather  when i say last night  i really mean this morning because it
was a good deal after midnight when it happened ”

“can you give me the exact time?” sir clinton asked 

ernest looked at him owlishly  reflected for a moment or two  and then
shook his head in a care worn fashion 

“no  i don’t think so  i didn’t look at the clock  you know  it was
after midnight  that’s all i can remember ”

“begin at the beginning  then  mr  shandon  and give us all the
details you can  anything may turn out to be useful for all we can
tell ”

“i usually go to bed quite early ” ernest began  “but last night 
after you went away  i thought i would have another look over roger’s
papers  you interrupted me  you remember ” he said  as though in
explanation of his activity  “i got quite interested in some of them 
roger had so many irons in the fire  i hadn’t realised before what an
amount of energy he must have had  you’ve no idea of the amount of
things he was mixed up in ”

“yes?” said sir clinton  trying to hasten the slow progress of the
narrative 

“such an amount of things ” ernest went on  “it took me all my time to
make head or tail of the papers i looked at  i must have been hours
and hours  turning them over and reading bits here and there—files of
correspondence and that sort of thing  his cheque book stubs were
there  too  and i looked at them  i’d no idea so much cash passed
through his hands  no idea at all  by the way  i noticed something
funny about his last cheque book  i’ll tell you about that again 
though  it was rum  i thought  but i’d better be getting on with the
story ”

sir clinton nodded patiently and waited for more 

“i’d just been looking over the cheque book when i heard a noise ”
ernest pursued  “of course  in an old house like this one often hears
sounds at night  furniture cracking and doors rattling  and all that
sort of thing  so i didn’t pay any attention to it at the time  it was
only afterwards that i remembered i’d heard it  and perhaps it had
nothing to do with the burglary at all  i just mention it  because you
said i was to give you all the details i could  you know ”

“what sort of sound was it?” sir clinton asked 

ernest looked bewildered 

“what sort of sound was it?” he repeated  “oh  a noise  you know 
a       a      ” he seemed to find the english language too limited 
“it was a sound  you understand ”

“a voice?” suggested sir clinton 

“no  not a voice  a sound  just like a snick or a rap or something of
that sort  if you see what i mean ”

“and then?”

“oh  i paid no attention to it  in a house like this one often hears
queer noises at night  it didn’t really draw my attention  i was
interested in this thing about the cheque book  so i didn’t trouble
about the sound ”

wendover was surprised at sir clinton’s patience  for no sign of
boredom appeared on his face  in fact  he seemed keenly interested 

“the next thing i remember ” ernest continued  “was feeling sleepy  i
put away the papers  put them all back in the safe again and locked it
up  then i thought i’d go to bed  i always go out for a breath of
fresh air before i go to my room at night—if it isn’t raining—so i
went to the window and looked out  it was quite dry  so i made up my
mind to go for my usual stroll  i don’t go far  you know  just up and
down a little near the house  it seems to me that a breath of fresh
air clears your lungs and makes you sleep better after you’ve had it 
i’m a great believer in fresh air  i hate sitting in a stuffy
room—must have the windows open always ”

“so you went out?”

“yes  i put on a light overcoat and a cap and i opened the front door 
it was locked when i found it—i suppose that’s important?”

sir clinton made no audible comment 

“i went out into the garden and strolled round the house  that took me
under the window of the room where neville—my brother—had been
sleeping during his stay here  and  d’you know? i found a ladder
sticking up against the wall there and resting against neville’s
window sill  and when i looked up  there was the window open!”

sir clinton interrupted him 

“was there a light in the room?”

ernest blinked hopelessly for a moment or two 

“was there a light? there may have been  did i say anything about a
light to you  stenness  when i waked you up? no? well  i don’t think
there was a light  there may have been  but now i come to think of it
i don’t remember seeing a light  no  i’m almost sure the electric
light wasn’t on in the room  i’d have noticed that  i’d have seen that
at once  no  there was no light ”

wendover intervened with a suggestion 

“perhaps the burglars heard you coming and switched off ”

sir clinton had evidently heard all he wished to know about the light 

“and what happened next  mr  shandon?”

“when i came to the bottom of the ladder  i said to myself 
‘burglars’  you remember you’d been talking about how easy it would be
to get into whistlefield  that very night  in the museum  then i had
an idea  i took away the ladder as quietly as i could  that would
prevent them getting out of the window again  you see? and then i went
off back to the front door  let myself in  and roused stenness and
young torrance  i was very nervous  you understand  anyone might be 
after getting a surprise like that ”

he took a fresh cigarette and lighted it with care  as he was about to
continue his narrative  sir clinton arrested him and turned to
stenness 

“perhaps you could give us your experiences  mr  stenness ”

“i’d gone to bed at the usual time  and fell asleep  i was waked up by
someone knocking at my door  and when i got up i found it was mr 
shandon  he said there were burglars in the room that mr  neville
shandon’s body was lying in  mr  shandon had on a cap and a light
overcoat  as soon as he had waked me  he went off to wake mr 
torrance  i looked at my watch  it was 2 35 a m  i picked up the poker
from my fireside and went out of my room  mr  torrance was there  too 
by that time  i suggested that he had better get a poker as well  or
else go down to the gun room and get something better  he got a poker 
then all three of us went to neville shandon’s room  the door was
locked  but we burst it in without making much of a noise  it’s an old
door  and the lock fitted very poorly  there was no light on in the
room when i got to it ”

“i’m almost sure  now i think over it  that there wasn’t any light at
the window ” ernest began again  “i couldn’t have helped seeing it 
could i? of course  all the rest of the house was dark  so if that
window was dark it wouldn’t catch my eye and i wouldn’t remember about
it  but if it had been lit up  i’d have noticed it at once ”

stenness took no notice of the interruption 

“somebody had evidently been in the room  everything was upside down 
all the drawers had been ransacked and their contents had been thrown
about  neville shandon’s attaché case had been treated in the same
way  the whole place was in confusion ”

“did you make out what the thieves had been searching for?”

“well  his writing case had been torn open and most of the contents
had been strewn about the floor  they’d been in a great hurry over
their work  and his pocket book was pitched over into one corner of
the room as if someone had been through the contents and had chucked
it away ”

“what about money? his note case was lying on the dressing table  i
put it there myself when i searched his body yesterday ”

“some notes were lying on the floor amongst the rest of the stuff  i
didn’t count them  in fact i didn’t touch anything  i thought you’d
better see things as they were ”

“the window was still open?”

“yes ”

“it looks as though the burglar (or burglars) had got away before mr 
shandon saw the ladder  then  they’d cleared out and left the ladder
in position  what about the key of the door?”

“it hasn’t turned up ”

“and what happened after that? why didn’t you ring up the police at
once?”

stenness suppressed a sardonic smile with evident difficulty 

“mr  shandon was to look after that part  i went back to my room  put
on some clothes  and kept myself awake by reading till the morning  we
hadn’t roused the rest of the people in the house ”

sir clinton turned to ernest 

“couldn’t you get through to the police station  mr  shandon? i must
see about this  it’s a serious matter for my subordinates ”

ernest seemed completely taken aback by this view of the question 

“well  sir clinton  i suppose i ought to have rung up the police  but
it was very late  you know  i was awfully sleepy  and as i was walking
along  i turned into my own bedroom  i was very shaken up by the whole
affair  it hasn’t happened to me before  you see  and somehow  i must
have begun to undress quite without thinking about it—you know how one
does things unconsciously      ”

then  with disarming frankness  he admitted the truth 

“i went to bed  and after a minute or two  i remembered i ought to
have rung up the police  but that would have meant getting out of bed
again and putting on some clothes to go down to the ’phone  it would
have been a lot of trouble  and it didn’t seem to me that it mattered
very much really  so while i was thinking about it  i fell asleep  but
i rang you up as soon as i got up this morning ”

sir clinton made no comment on ernest’s methods  he had got all the
information he needed apparently  for now he turned to stenness and
suggested that they should go upstairs and look at the scene of the
burglary 

neville shandon’s room bore out stenness’s description of it 
everything seemed to have been turned over and left higgledy piggledy 
the floor was littered with a confused mass of clothes  papers 
contents of drawers  and other things  it seemed as though the whole
place had been searched in frantic haste for some object or other  but
whether the seeker had succeeded or not was apparently an insoluble
problem 

sir clinton stepped over to the still open window and examined the
sill 

“the marks of the ladder ends are there  clear enough ” he pointed out
to wendover  “and there’s the ladder itself down on the ground ”

he beckoned stenness to his side 

“one of your own ladders  i suppose?”

stenness examined it 

“yes  i happen to recognise it  the gardeners use it  and it’s kept
somewhere about the place ”

“some soil on the window sill ” sir clinton pointed out  “they must
have picked it up on their boots from the flower bed where the end of
the ladder rests ”

“there’s some on the floor here  as well ” stenness pointed out 

“so i see ” sir clinton confirmed  “but that might have been brought
up by mr  shandon when you and he came in here  one can’t attach much
importance to it ”

he said nothing more  and contented himself with a careful inspection
of the room 

“i think i’ve seen all i want to see ” he said at last  “by the way 
you haven’t a key of the maze  have you? i noticed the iron gates at
each entrance had locks on them  i want to go down there now and look
round ”

“i can get you a key  i think ” stenness said  doubtfully  “but the
place is always left open  it’s never been locked at any time  to my
knowledge ”

“oh  that’s all right then ” sir clinton hastened to say  “now 
wendover  i think we’ll be getting along ”

a thought seemed to strike him at the last moment 

“if you’re afraid of being worried by any more burglars  mr  shandon 
i’ll detach a couple of constables to look after whistlefield  but i
really don’t think it’s the least likely that you’ll have any further
attempts of the sort  they seem to have made a thorough business of
this one  to judge by the state they left the place in ”

ernest seemed rather shamefaced at the chief constable’s proposal 
quite obviously he recognised that he had not shone as a hero in the
business of the night 

“no ” he replied  “i don’t think we need them  sir clinton  i think
we’ll manage without them  really  of course  one feels a little
nervous  i think it’s quite understandable  when things have been
happening all together like this  but still  i don’t think we really
need a guard  if you think it’s not likely to happen again  i’m quite
ready to take your view of it  quite ready  i assure you  as you say 
there’s no reason why they should come back at all  they must have got
what they wanted  they’re sure to have got it  i think  no  they’re
hardly likely to come back again ”

as they made their way downstairs sylvia hawkhurst met them 

“i’ve been looking for you  sir clinton  guess what you left behind
you last night ”

sir clinton shook his head doubtfully 

“i never succeed in these guessing competitions  miss hawkhurst  what
was it?”

“the box of darts! you put it down on the mantlepiece of the museum 
and i happened to notice it this morning when i went in ”

sir clinton’s face betrayed his annoyance at his blunder  it was so
obvious that no one cared to say anything on the subject 

“i’ll get it for you in a moment ” sylvia said  as she hurried off 

stenness looked at the chief constable  and it seemed as if his
estimate of sir clinton was undergoing revision  wendover was
completely taken aback by the turn of events 

“here it is ” sylvia said  as she came back to them again  “it was
just where you left it  you’d better count the darts to make sure i
haven’t lost any—though i haven’t opened the box at all  i was too
much afraid of them ”

sir clinton obeyed and found the total correct  he shut the box
carefully and stowed it away in his pocket 

“thanks  miss hawkhurst  it was very careless of me  but there’s no
harm done  since you’ve taken care of them for me ”

and after a few words about the affairs of the night  he took his
leave 

“take the road to the east gate  squire ” he requested  as wendover
let in the clutch 

“ you ’re a bright detective ” his friend retorted scornfully  “here
you’ve been racing and chasing to cut off a possible source of curare 
and in the middle of the job you leave a whole tin of lethal darts
lying about for tom  dick or harry to pick up  the limit  i’d call
it!”

“it was very careless ” sir clinton admitted  biting his lip 

“careless!” wendover echoed  contemptuously  “i can’t think how you
managed to do it  my godfathers! leaving stuff like that on a
mantelpiece!”

sir clinton flushed 

“look here  squire  i can say ‘you’re a damned fool ’ just as often as
i need to hear it just now  without your help  you can’t guess how i
feel about it  don’t rub it in  there’s a good chap ”

wendover had never seen his friend so disturbed before  he stopped his
denunciations at once  in a few moments they reached the maze  and
both left the car  sir clinton led the way to the entrance through
which they had gone on the previous afternoon 

“i’d better take the lead ” said wendover  “i know the maze and you
don’t  just follow me ”

sir clinton paid no attention but kept in front  to wendover’s
surprise he showed no hesitation  but threaded his way through the
labyrinth without difficulty  when he reached the centre he turned to
his companion 

“that’s merely to show you that anyone can find their way through here
if they keep their heads  i memorised the thing as stenness was
guiding us yesterday—first right  third left  and so on  so you see
the murderer could have got up it easily enough if he had someone to
show him the ropes at the start ”

he glanced into the centre and then passed round to the position of
the loophole in the outer hedge  as he did so he gave an exclamation
of disgust and passed his hand over his face 

“ugh! spider’s web got across my mouth! there’s any amount of gossamer
about here  these hedges must be full of spiders  beastly things!”

coming to the loophole  he examined it carefully as though to discover
the range of view from it  then he made his way to the loophole
commanding the second centre  which he inspected with equal interest 

“now we’ll go outside and have another look at the track my dog picked
up ” he announced  curtly 

wendover followed him once more  and they emerged from the entrance
near the river  sir clinton walked over to the tree to which the dog
had led them  and then  using the scraps of paper scattered on the
previous day as his guide  he crossed the grass  once on the road  he
stopped and turned to wendover  he seemed to be still smarting under
the annoyance of his blunder with the darts 

“that’s the murderer’s route  you see? he came out of the maze
obviously  then he climbed that tree  i think you said  no doubt he
was well out of danger there  no one would think of looking for him up
amongst the leaves  and after that he came over here  got into his
private aeroplane  and flew off—since the trail stops short ”

he glanced up and down the road 

“just the one place where he could have done it  notice  this bit of
the road is concealed from nearly every direction by these banks of
rhododendrons round about ”

wendover took no notice of the irony  he sympathised with sir
clinton’s feelings  it required no great stretch of imagination to
appreciate how a man would feel after making a mistake like that  they
walked over to the car and took the road to the east gate 

as he drove  wendover began to fit together the new facts in the
whistlefield case  the more he recalled the state of neville shandon’s
room  the more obvious it grew that the burglar had been searching for
a document of some sort  this linked itself in his mind with the torn
fragment of neville’s notes which had been found in his hand after
death  and roger’s room had not been burgled 

“it looks like hackleton at work ” he uttered  half unconsciously 

sir clinton seemed to come out of a savage reverie at the words 

“hackleton? oh  you mean the burglary? it fits neatly in  doesn’t it?”

then  in a more friendly voice than he had used since the dart
incident 

“i’m sorry if i rubbed you on the raw  squire  but you know how i hate
to look like a fool  and that’s exactly what i do look like just now ”

wendover was eager to accept the advance  he had no desire to irritate
his friend  after all  everyone makes mistakes sooner or later  but as
they fell into talk again a fresh idea shot through his mind  and this
time he did not utter it aloud 

“clinton hustled me off early to bed last night  he was
washed out looking this morning  he hinted he’d done something or
other that was risky  what if he was the burglar himself?”

but though he puzzled over this view of the case  it yielded very
little help to him  at last he put it to the back of his mind  ready
for future reference if needed 

sir clinton had one further surprise for him as they reached the
grange 

“would you mind  squire  if somebody brings a glass of boiling water 
some vinegar  and some washing soda to my room as soon as possible?
i’d like to have them now ”



chapter x 

the third attack in the maze

when sir clinton came down from his room wendover noticed that he had
mastered his vexation  during lunch  both of them avoided the
whistlefield case by tacit consent  but the squire was relieved to see
that his friend’s face showed less anxiety in its expression than had
been obvious at the breakfast table  sir clinton usually had complete
control of his features and showed no more than he wished the world to
see  and wendover guessed that behind the mask the chief constable was
still too sensitive to make the affair at whistlefield a safe subject
of conversation 

when lunch was over sir clinton smoked a cigarette for a minute or two
in silence  then he turned to his host 

“you might lend me your car  squire  i ought to go down to the police
station this afternoon and get some reports from the man in charge  it
isn’t worth your while to come with me  they’ll only be formal
affairs  i suspect  and if there’s anything striking  i’ll tell you
about it when i get back ”

wendover consented  his tact suggested that sir clinton would probably
prefer to be alone until the first edge of his irritation had worn
off 

when the chief constable returned  however  he had little news of
importance 

“there’s no sign of the burglars so far ” he admitted  “i rang up the
police from whistlefield in the morning and put them on the alert  but
they’ve picked up nothing that looks like the shadow of a clue  one
could hardly expect it  thanks to friend ernest’s lethargic habits  a
burglar could have got to the midlands before my men even knew of the
whistlefield affair ”

“i suppose they’ve done all they can?”

“for a local lot handling a thing of this sort  they’ve really done
very well  they’ve made inquiries at all the railway stations in the
neighbourhood and drawn blank  no suspicious person can be traced
there  they’ve done their best in the matter of motors  too  but that 
of course  was rather a wash out  one can’t expect them to keep tally
of every car that might pass along the road  and they’ve had a regular
hunt through the whistlefield gardens to find out how the burglary was
done  but there again they struck a blank end ”

“footmarks on the flower bed?” inquired wendover 

“one or two beautifully rectangular impressions—that’s all  the fellow
evidently tied bits of cardboard under his shoes  one hasn’t even an
idea of the size of his foot  and of course friend ernest had been
stamping about all over the bed in his efforts to remove the ladder
with least trouble to himself  he didn’t exaggerate when he said he
was nervous  it seems he just gave the thing a push and let it fall
anyhow—smashed some flowers to bits in the collapse  if the burglars
were still in the room above the row must have put them on the alert
at once ”

“you think they may have got away into the house and been hidden there
while stenness and co  were breaking into the room?”

“well  you can lock a door from either side  can’t you?”

wendover reflected for a moment 

“it’s a pity stenness didn’t think of searching the house when they
found no one in the room ”

“much too late by that time  squire  no hunted burglar would wait on
the premises a second longer than he could help  he’d be off
downstairs at once and get out of the ground floor windows on the
opposite side of the house ”

“but then he’d leave an unlatched window behind him ”

“so he may have done  no one can swear that all the windows were made
fast yesterday evening  they’re a careless lot up at whistlefield ”

wendover’s mind fastened upon the thing which seemed to him of most
importance 

“what did the burglar want? what was he after  clinton?”

sir clinton’s face became inscrutable  though wendover could not help
seeing irony in his reply 

“‘what song the syrens sang  or what name achilles assumed when he hid
himself among women  though puzzling questions are not beyond all
conjecture ’” he quoted  “sir thomas browne knew what he was talking
about  what thing the burglar sought  though puzzling is not beyond
conjecture  squire  the field’s open  if you wish to enter for the
competition ”

wendover accepted the irony as a proof that sir clinton had got over
his fit of annoyance completely 

“well  then  i conjecture that the burglar was in hackleton’s pay—like
the murderer—and that he was hunting for more of neville shandon’s
notes for the case  look how everything was turned upside down  look
at the fact that the money was left intact  that wasn’t what one
expects from a normal burglar ”

“no  it wasn’t ” sir clinton agreed  “but i’m not going to be drawn 
go on with your conjecturing  squire  and if that fails you might take
to surmising or speculating as a change of occupation  thinking
exercises the brain  so you won’t really lose in the end ”

“you’re an exasperating beast at times  clinton ” wendover affirmed 
without a trace of irritation 

“if that’s the first result of thinking  i don’t think i’d take it up
as a hobby ” sir clinton responded cheerfully  “it might lead to
peevishness among the neighbours ”

he walked over to the window  possibly to conceal his expression 
before communicating his next piece of information 

“i had time to drop in on your friend ardsley  too  on my way home ”

wendover rose to the bait at once 

“oh  indeed! i hope he showed you his best specimens  a pithed frog 
perhaps  or a mangled dog? it’s no good lifting these eyebrows of
yours  clinton  i don’t like the fellow ”

“one could almost guess it from the way you talk  but bear in mind 
squire  that even the meanest of god’s creatures may have its uses 
i’ve got a use for ardsley ” he added carelessly  “so don’t go making
things too unpleasant if you come across him any time ”

wendover gave a half suppressed growl 

“one rubs up against a lot of queer fish when one begins mixing with
the police  it seems ” he complained  half in fun and half in earnest 

before sir clinton could reply  the bell of the telephone rang
sharply 

“bet you nine to four that’s whistlefield ringing up ” the chief
constable offered  “here  i’ll go myself ”

he left the room and wendover waited uneasily for the result of the
conversation  it took a minute or two and he knew from this that it
must be something relating to whistlefield  for sir clinton had no
friends in the neighbourhood  when the chief constable returned 
wendover looked up with a certain foreboding  news from whistlefield
of late had never been encouraging  and he feared that something more
might have happened 

“did you take that bet?” inquired sir clinton  “if so  you owe me a
note or two  it was whistlefield at the other end of the line  just as
i expected  if this goes on  we may as well tell the exchange to leave
their plug in our hole permanently and save bother to all hands ”

“what’s happened now?” demanded wendover anxiously 

“an attempted murder this time  your friend ernest rang up to tell me
about it  they’ve tried to get him next  but he fled like a lamb from
the slaughter and seems to have saved his bacon  but he’s in a
pitiable state ” sir clinton went on  a tingle of contempt coming into
his tone  “quite blue with funk  i should judge  he nearly wept into
the mouthpiece  and i could hear him gasping for breath at the other
end of the wire  quite a shock to his nerves  it appears  we’ll have
to go across and comfort him  come along ”

“you don’t seem much worried over his troubles ” wendover commented 

“i’ve no great use for a cowardly little beast  you should have heard
him on the ’phone  wendover  sounded like one of those things they
used to run in the grand guignol ”

“even the meanest of god’s creatures may have its uses ” wendover
quoted  sarcastically 

sir clinton’s temporary cheerfulness seemed to have passed away 

“that’s a true word spoken in jest  no doubt  you’re perhaps right
after all  we may find a use for even friend ernest before we’re done 
but on the face of it  it doesn’t look probable  does it?”

when they reached whistlefield they were shown at once into the study
where they found ernest in a state of nervous collapse  a syphon and a
decanter stood on a tray at his elbow  and the moving surface of the
whisky showed that he had just finished pouring out a drink  as they
came in  he poured some more liquor into his empty tumbler 

“i think i’d leave it at that  mr  shandon ” sir clinton suggested 
coolly  “we’d better not run any risk of your memory getting
confused ”

ernest took his hand away from the tumbler obediently  wendover could
see that he was trembling  and he seemed to be in a condition
bordering on panic 

“now  let’s have the story as briefly as possible  if you please ” sir
clinton requested 

ernest looked helplessly round the room for a moment 

“i can hardly believe i’m safe ” he explained  “i’ve had such a time 
such a time  dreadful!”

“yes  tell us about it ”

“after dinner  i thought i’d go down and have a look at the maze ”
ernest continued  “i hadn’t been there  you know  since the affair
happened  and i thought i might as well go down and look round the
place  i wish i’d never had the idea  such a time i’ve had ”

his eyeglasses slipped askew on his nose and he laboriously set them
right before continuing 

“damn these things! i must get a new pair  they’re always dropping
off ”

“yes?” sir clinton repeated  patiently  all his levity had vanished 
wendover noticed  now that he had come to real business 

“after lunch i thought i’d go down to the maze  but it seemed a lot of
trouble  going all that distance  and i very nearly gave up the idea 
i wish i had  but then i thought of the push bike i keep in the
garage  it would be easy enough to pedal down on it  so i got it out
and went off by the road that leads to the east gate ”

he put out his hand tentatively towards the tumbler  but drew it back
again at the sight of sir clinton’s frown  he looked like an overgrown
baby caught in the act of mischief 

“yes?” sir clinton repeated once more 

“i went into the maze  you know  never thinking that anything could
possibly happen there  i never dreamed of anything happening  you
understand? and i walked through it to helen’s bower—the place where
my brother roger was murdered  you remember? and when i got there i
sat down  i’d come a good way  you see  and i felt that i’d like to
sit down ”

“did you see anyone in or near the maze up to that moment?” asked sir
clinton 

ernest pondered for a moment or two  his trepidation  far from
brightening him  seemed to have made him look duller than ever 

“no ” he said  hesitatingly at last  “i can’t say i did  i don’t
remember seeing anyone ”

“and then?”

“where was i? oh  yes  i sat down  it was rather hot  and i thought
i’d like a seat  i meant to sit there and smoke a cigar before looking
round the maze  i sat there for a while  i don’t quite know how long 
some time  at least  and then i may have fallen into a doze  the sun
was very hot  even when i was in the shade of the hedge  you
understand? it makes you sleepy  i suppose i dozed off  perhaps i was
asleep for quite a while ”

“you can’t give me anything more exact than that  can you  mr 
shandon?”

“no  i’m afraid i can’t  it was quite a while  though  i feel pretty
sure of that ”

he put out his hand towards the tumbler again 

“i really think i’d get on better if i had another drink ”

sir clinton looked at him with unconcealed distaste  then he picked up
the tumbler himself 

“two fingers then ”

he went across to the window and poured away the surplus from ernest’s
generously filled glass 

“now  come along  mr  shandon  the sooner we get your story the sooner
i can get to work  you must pull yourself together ”

ernest shandon drank off his whiskey neat and then gave a sigh of
relief 

“i feel better now  i’ve really had a terrible time! where was i? oh 
yes  i woke up ”

“thrilling!” said sir clinton  brutally  “and what next?”

wendover could not help seeing that sir clinton’s temper was wearing
thin under the strain of listening to this outpouring of rambling
narrative  and this time there was no stenness who could be turned on
to complete the tale  they were dependent entirely on the
terror stricken creature before them 

“i woke up ” ernest repeated  staring at them with wide opened eyes as
though chronicling some vast convulsion of nature  “and just after i
woke up i seemed to hear steps somewhere near me  i wasn’t very wide
awake  you understand? and i sat listening for a moment or two—or it
may have been for a little longer than that ” he added with an evident
effort at exactitude  “and i thought to myself it might be young
torrance or stenness  it couldn’t have been the girls  you see?
because they had taken the car and gone off to do some shopping in
ambledown  i know that  because they said they were going there and i
wondered why they didn’t go to stanningleigh  which is nearer  but i
suppose they wanted to go to some special shop in ambledown  there are
better shops in ambledown      ”

a glimpse of the expression on sir clinton’s face brought him suddenly
back to his direct narrative 

“so i called out  ‘who’s there?’ just like that  you know  but nobody
replied  so i was wondering who it could be  and i was just going to
call again when suddenly i heard the noise of an air gun going off 
and something whizzed past me as close as that!”

he indicated a track almost grazing his cheek 

“i jumped up  i didn’t wait to hear any more  i can take the right
decision as quick as most people  i assure you  sir clinton  i ran as
fast as i could to the entrance  and then i heard the fellow
re loading the gun! it was dreadful! my blood didn’t freeze or
anything like that  but i suffered agonies—agonies!”

“quite so ” said sir clinton soothingly  “you were in a blue funk  we
quite understand  an alarming situation  and what happened after
that?”

“i ran out into the maze  luckily i’d spotted where the fellow was  he
was at the same loophole that he’d used when he killed roger  oh  i
had all my wits about me  i was really very cool  considering the
state of affairs ”

“and then?”

“then i ran through the maze as hard as i could  such a time! fancy
having the fellow after me with those darts!”

“he followed you  then?”

“it would be what he  would  do  wouldn’t it?”

“you mean that you didn’t actually hear him?”

“no  i didn’t hear him  i didn’t wait to hear anything  i was so busy
getting out of the maze  of course  i know the maze well  but it’s
difficult to keep your head in a case like that  very difficult  but i
did it ” he ended proudly  “i got away from the fellow  never as much
as saw him ”

his glasses slipped off again in the excitement of his peroration  and
he adjusted them painfully 

“these things do give one a lot of bother ” he complained  “i expect
it’s the perspiration on my nose  with all that running  i haven’t run
for years ”

“you got out of the maze safely  then  what next?”

“i got on to my bicycle and rode away as hard as i could  what a
blessing i had that machine there  eh? if i hadn’t  he might have run
me down in the open quite easily  i was quite out of breath ”

“then?”

“then i went to the telephone and rang you up at the grange  i had an
idea you’d be there  if you hadn’t been  i’d have tried the
police station ”

“quite right  mr  shandon  now there are one or two points i must have
cleared up  first of all  it seems you met no one either going to the
maze or coming back from it  did you shout or call for assistance at
all on your way to the house?”

“i couldn’t ” ernest admitted  simply  “i hadn’t any breath left to
shout with  you don’t understand what it was like  i assure you ”

“was there no one about?”

“no ” ernest answered after a pause  “arthur had gone off somewhere 
he generally seems to go off by himself  quite often one doesn’t see
him for hours  i don’t know where he was  and torrance was out of the
road  too  i can’t tell you where he was  perhaps he’d walked over to
stanningleigh  or perhaps he’d gone somewhere else  i haven’t seen him
since lunch time ”

“and mr  stenness?”

to wendover’s surprise the sound of stenness’s name seemed to
galvanise ernest  his terror appeared to increase again  just when it
had seemed to be dying down 

“stenness!” he repeated  “oh  stenness      ”

he broke off short  as though afraid he had been heard 

“just a moment ” he muttered  and rose from his chair 

wendover could see that the man’s knees were trembling  ernest walked
across to the door  opened it gently  and peered out with a caution
which had in it a touch of the ludicrous 

“nobody there ” he explained  as he came back again  “you never know ”

“what’s behind this  mr  shandon?” sir clinton demanded  impatiently 
“if you’ve any information  it’s your duty to give it to me at once 
have you anything to tell me about mr  stenness?”

ernest made a gesture  appealing piteously for a lowering of sir
clinton’s voice 

“you remember ” he continued  almost in a whisper  “that the other
night—i mean last night  the night of the burglary—i was going through
roger’s papers  i think i told you before that i was doing that 
didn’t i? and amongst his papers i came across his cheque books and
some stubs  i was looking through these  just to see what things he’d
been spending money on—the firms he’d been dealing with  and so forth 
you understand? and quite by accident  i noticed something funny  the
counterfoil of the last missing cheque had been cut out of the book 
i’d never have noticed it if it hadn’t been that i was looking at the
numbers  it was cut away very carefully  very neatly indeed  you know 
but there was the counterfoil for the cheque before it numbered
something like 60072 and the next one in the book was numbered 60074
or some figures like these  there was a missing number in the series 
and there was another funny thing  i happened to look at the last
bundle of returned cheques in roger’s drawer  he hadn’t destroyed
them  it seems  for some reason or other  i can’t think why  myself 
but there they were  and one of them was missing from the series ”

“there’s nothing mysterious in that ” wendover objected  “it may have
been a cheque that went abroad  and hasn’t been returned to the bank
yet  your brother had interests overseas ”

ernest’s dull eyes brightened slightly in triumph 

“that’s where you’re wrong  wendover  that’s a mistake  i was curious
about the thing  it seemed to me so funny  so i looked up the
counterfoil of that missing cheque in roger’s stub  and it was a
cheque for some hundreds and it was made payable to his stockbrokers 
that seemed funnier than ever  didn’t it? a cheque like that would go
right back to the bank with no delay  it would be paid in immediately 
i’m sure it would  wouldn’t it? of course  sure to be  you know?”

sir clinton had been following this with keen interest 

“and where does mr  stenness come in?” he asked  ernest looked round
the room again as though he feared that stenness might be concealed
somewhere 

“well ” he said  reluctantly  “stenness had access to roger’s papers 
he could have got at this cheque book  i’m sure  roger was a bit
careless  sometimes  i’ve seen his cheque book lying about on the
table often  i remember i saw it last tuesday  was it? or was it
wednesday? it was in the morning  i know that ”

sir clinton’s face showed uncommon interest now 

“and you think      ?” he prompted 

ernest poured out another stiff glass of whiskey  this time unchecked
by anyone 

“i can’t say i think anything  really  i shouldn’t like to go so far
as that  you understand  that might be going too far  but i let slip
to you that i’d found something funny amongst the cheques  last night 
i mean i told you this morning what i’d found last night  or
rather      ”

“i understand ” said sir clinton  rescuing him from his tangle 
“and      ?”

“and stenness was there when i mentioned it  he knew i’d found some
hanky panky ”

sir clinton leaned back in his chair and thought for a moment or two 

“i see what’s in your mind  mr  shandon ” he said at length  “well 
that can be put straight easily enough  so long as you were the only
person who knew of this affair  you might be a danger to the fellow
who was responsible for what you call the hanky panky  it might be
worth his while to put you out of the way—silence you  eh? and cover
the business up ”

ernest’s starting eyes showed that he had no liking for such plain
discourse 

“then ” continued sir clinton  “the remedy’s simple  just tell whoever
it is—we needn’t drag in names  need we?—that you’ve mentioned the
matter to me  then there will be no point in disturbing you further 
you see? you’ll be quite safe  once you’ve done that  doubly safe  in
fact  for any further attack on you would be a bit too suspicious 
that’s your best course ”

“i never thought of that ” said ernest  gratefully  “it’s a relief  i
can tell you  such a relief! and you think there’ll be no chance of
another attack on me?”

“i’d take almost any odds against it ” sir clinton reassured him 

“well  i shall stay inside the house altogether for a week or two  at
any rate ” ernest decided  his fears returning suddenly  “that ought
to be safe enough ”

he applied himself again to the decanter 

sir clinton had one last question to put 

“where was stenness while you were down at the maze?”

ernest stood with his tumbler arrested on the road to his mouth while
he pondered over the matter 

“i don’t know ” he admitted finally  “i really can’t say  i left him
here  working at roger’s papers  and i told him i was going to helen’s
bower  but when i came back again he wasn’t here  he’d put the papers
away  i don’t know where he’d gone ”

“ah  indeed?” said sir clinton ruminatively  but he made no further
comment 



chapter xi 

the squire’s theories

“we’ll have another look at the maze  squire  if you don’t mind
stopping there ”

wendover nodded  he had expected the suggestion 

“you didn’t seem to overflow with sympathy for shandon ” he commented 

“friend ernest raises my gorge ” admitted sir clinton frankly  “did
you ever see a man in such a state? i never could stand that sort of
thing ”

then  as though he felt he had been too hard on ernest  he added
perfunctorily 

“of course  he’d had rather a bad half hour of it ”

“i admire the restraint of your language ” said wendover with a smile 
“but  you know  clinton  i think you’re a bit hard on the beggar  what
could he do but run? i’d have run myself  and i make no bones about it
either ”

“oh  so would i ” sir clinton conceded carelessly  “it wasn’t the
running that put my back up ”

“you mean that there’s running  and  running  so to speak?”

“exactly  look at the case of that girl who was in the maze when the
murders were done—miss forrest  i mean  she had just as much right as
ernest to get hysterical  i won’t say she was as cool as a cucumber
when we saw her  one couldn’t expect that  but she kept her nerves in
order  she didn’t arrive at the house afterwards in a state of
whimpering panic ”

“no  that’s true ” wendover confirmed  “she’s worth a dozen of ernest
shandon at a pinch  that girl  she kept her head and did exactly what
was wanted ”

“quite so  she wasn’t thinking of her own skin all the time like
friend ernest ”

“what’s all this about stenness?” wendover demanded  “is it merely
some rot that ernest’s squirted out in the middle of his funk  or is
there anything in it?”

“here’s the maze ” sir clinton interrupted  cutting him short 
“suppose we postpone discussion till after dinner to night  squire  i
don’t want to be distracted for the next few minutes if you don’t
mind ”

they entered the maze and made their way towards helen’s bower  near
the door into it wendover stopped suddenly and pointed to the pathway
at their feet 

“hullo! look  clinton! there’s a bit of black thread lying on the
ground ”

they stooped over it and examined the fibre 

“ordinary sewing silk off a reel  obviously ” was all that sir clinton
vouchsafed 

wendover thought he had seen more in the matter 

“don’t you see what it is  clinton? ariadne’s clue! it’s a thread that
the murderer must have been using to find his way out of the maze in a
hurry ”

“i showed you before that there’s no difficulty in the maze if you’ve
once been taken to the centre ”

wendover had his answer in readiness 

“yes  but suppose you were the murderer  you would have to get out in
a hurry  wouldn’t you? and you might lose your head  anybody might get
confused in the flurry  so he took the precaution of laying the thread
to the exit  and all he had to do was to follow it and reel it up as
he went  and this time a bit of it caught somewhere—see  this end’s
tangled in the hedge—and so broke off and he had to leave it behind 
when the shandons were murdered he probably managed to reel up the
whole of it and so left no trace behind him ”

“sounds plausible ” sir clinton commented curtly  “we may as well
collect the specimen  though really there’s nothing distinctive about
it  one bit of thread’s very much like another ”

“sherlock holmes might have made more out of it than that ” said
wendover  rather resentful at the way his discovery had been treated 

“doubtless  but as he isn’t here  what can we do? just bumble along to
the best of our poor abilities  that’s what i’m doing  squire ”

they entered the tiny enclosure of helen’s bower  and wendover’s eye
was at once caught by a sparkle from the grass near one of the chairs 
he stepped across and picked up a silver cigar case  sir clinton held
out his hand for it and glanced at the outside 

“it’s got a monogram  e s   engraved on it ” he said  “this is
obviously friend ernest’s  you remember he said something about
smoking a cigar here  he may have laid the case on his knee and jerked
it off without noticing it when he started on his marathon for
safety ”

he held the case in his hand and seemed to give careful consideration
to some point  at last he came to a decision and turned to wendover 

“i think we’ll say nothing about this for a day or two  squire  i may
want to send this case up to london to have it examined  perhaps  i
can’t say yet  but in the meanwhile we’ll not mention that we found
it  friend ernest can take his cigars from the box  in the meantime 
that’s no great hardship for him ”

“you think the murderer may have picked it up  and you’ll get his
finger prints from it? it’s a nice smooth surface ”

sir clinton looked up from the case with a gleam of amusement on his
features 

“you’re in charge of the speculation  surmise  and conjecture
department of this firm  squire  i’m only a humble clerk in the mum
and dumb section—telegraphic address  ‘tongue tied ’”

wendover accepted the tacit rebuke without protest 

“oh  have it your own way ” he said  “i forgot i wasn’t to expect
anything from you ”

sir clinton wrapped the cigar case carefully in his handkerchief and
stowed it in his pocket before doing anything further 

“now i think we’d better go and have a look at the loophole again ” he
suggested  “though i hardly think it’s likely to have changed much
since i saw it last  but i have a sort of feeling that sherlock would
have found something there  and perhaps you might be able to spot it 
even if i can’t  that’s the worst of this detective business  one
needs an eye for detail and i never had it ”

with an air of deep solemnity he led the way to the outer side of the
hedge  approached the loophole  and peered into it for a time 

“no ” he admitted finally with a crestfallen air  “it seems just the
same as it was when i saw it last ”

he put his hand into the hole 

“not even a bird’s nest or any little thing of that kind ” he
announced disconsolately  “ah  we need sherlock  we need sherlock 
he’d have found some cigar ash or something of that sort  no doubt  i
can’t see it  have a look yourself  squire ”

rather irritated by the chaff  wendover stooped and stared into the
loophole  he had to confess  however  that he saw nothing in the
slightest degree suggestive 

“no broken twigs where the murderer rested his air gun?” sir clinton
inquired  “have a good look  the price is the same for two peeps as
for one  special terms by the hour  if you care to       ugh! damn
these spiders! that gossamer’s all over the place—filthy  filmy
stuff!”

he rubbed his hand on the hedge while wendover grinned at his
annoyance 

“serves you right  clinton! it’ll take your mind off all this
persiflage business ”

sir clinton seemed engrossed in removing the remaining filaments from
his hand 

“pity sherlock isn’t here ” he let fall in a regretful tone  “he
turned into an entomologist of sorts when he retired  perhaps he could
tell us what earthly use spiders can be ”

“they keep down flies ” said wendover  instructively 

“so they do  illuminating idea! i wish i’d thought of it myself  they
keep down flies!”

“when you’ve quite finished being funny  perhaps you’ll get on with
your job  clinton  you’re supposed to be detecting murderers  not
delivering lectures on insects ”

sir clinton dropped his jesting tone at once 

“quite right  we ought to be getting along to the police station now ”

“aren’t you going to do any more here?”

“no ”

“what about bringing up that dog of yours and seeing if it can do
anything?”

“the dog could do nothing in this case ” said sir clinton  definitely 
“it would be a mere waste of time ”

“well  you seem to know your own mind about that ” wendover said
rather wonderingly  “i suppose you know best  but i’d have thought it
worth trying ”

sir clinton made no reply  but led the way through the maze to the
car 

“we’ll call at the police station on the road home  squire  if you’ll
run us round there  i’m expecting some more reports  and some men must
come up here and search for anything left about—not that it really
matters  by the way ” he added  casually  “i suppose you know who the
murderer is by this time?”

wendover could only express astonishment at the question 

“well  you’ve had every chance ” was all that sir clinton would
vouchsafe 

“if you know who he is  why don’t you arrest him at once?” wendover
demanded 

“there’s a big gap between knowing a thing and proving it ” said sir
clinton  cautiously 

at the police station the chief constable got out of the car and went
in to interview his subordinates  in a minute or two he was back
again  with some papers in his hands  and they drove on to the grange 

“i’ve just time to ring up ardsley before going upstairs ” he said 
when they arrived  and he disappeared in the direction of the
telephone  wendover noticed that this time sir clinton closed the door
of the room behind him  instead of leaving it ajar as he had done on
the previous occasions  so that no sound came out during the
conversation 

“i wonder what he’s up to with that confounded jack the ripper ”
wendover speculated uneasily  as he went upstairs to dress  “well 
perhaps he’ll tell me something after dinner ”

but when they had settled themselves in their easy chairs after
dinner  he found that sir clinton evidently intended to reverse the
rôles 

“now then  squire   you’re  under no restraint of official secrecy 
what do you make of the affair so far?”

“i see  i’m to be watson  and then you’ll prove what an ass i am  i’m
not over keen ”

sir clinton hastened to reassure him 

“i’m not going to poke fun at you merely for the sake of making you
uncomfortable  squire  it would really be some help if i could see the
thing from a fresh point of view  lord knows  i’m not infallible  and
you may quite easily hit on something that’ll put a new light on
things and prevent me making a bad mistake ”

the obvious sincerity of this was enough to placate wendover  he had
been cogitating deeply over the whistlefield affair  and he felt that
if he could not suggest a provable solution of the mystery  at least
he could bring a reasonable amount of criticism to bear on the
available evidence 

“what we have to account for ” he began  “are  first  the murder of
the two shandons  second  the burglary  third  the attack on ernest
shandon  and  fourth  the so called hanky panky with the cheque ”

“that’s correct ” sir clinton agreed  “but suppose we leave out the
cheque affair at present  we really know nothing definite about it
yet ”

wendover was dissatisfied with this ruling 

“it seems to me an essential part in the scheme of things  let me put
the case as i see it  hackleton is at the back of the whole affair  i
take it  but he’s been employing an agent  and that agent has been
going beyond hackleton’s instructions and has been operating on his
own to a certain extent  i think that fits everything in the case ”

sir clinton seemed inclined to dispute this conclusion  but he
restrained himself and merely nodded to wendover to continue 

“i see your objection  i think ” the squire went on  “you meant to
say  ‘why were  both  the shandons murdered when it was only neville’s
death that was essential to hackleton?’ but there’s quite a plausible
explanation of that  you can’t hang a man twice  so if a man decides
to commit a single murder  he might as well commit two  the
punishment’s the same for a quantity  and if he can commit two with
equal impunity—as in the maze—mightn’t it occur to him that two
murders would be a stiffer problem than one murder  in these
particular circumstances? isn’t it the double murder that’s giving all
the difficulty? of course it is  if either shandon had been murdered
solus  we’d know at once the line to look up  but at present we don’t 
now why shouldn’t the murderer have seen that very point and utilised
it?”

sir clinton nodded 

“that’s ingenious  squire  i’m not ironical ”

“i’d rather choose that solution than any of the other possible ones 
if you reject it  you’ve got to assume that two independent murderers 
both using the same out of the way method  chose to operate
simultaneously  the chances against that are miles too big  or else
you have to believe that two co operating murderers were at work and
that each of them thought he had the right victim in front of him  i
can’t quite swallow the notion that this was a co operative affair 
the third solution is that the murderer mistook one brother for the
other  killed roger first  and then had to kill neville to carry out
his instructions  he might have had only a general description of
neville shandon to go on and may have made a mistake in identity ”

“i doubt if hackleton would have left any loophole of that sort ” sir
clinton interrupted  “neville’s portrait could easily have been bought
and given to the murderer  but it’s not worth while arguing the point 
the murderer knew the two shandons perfectly well by sight  i’m sure
of my ground there ”

“you mean the murderer was a local man?” demanded wendover  “how did
you find that out?”

“i’m not going to tell you at present  squire  sorry to play the
mystery man  and all that sort of stuff  but it has to be done ”

wendover was plainly distrustful of this point 

“if it  was  a local affair  what was the black silk thread then? the
thread we found in the maze not a couple of hours ago ”

sir clinton closed his eyes as though pondering deeply 

“yes indeed ” he said oracularly  “what was the silk thread?”

he sat up suddenly and beamed on wendover 

“i should say it was a clue ”

“damn your leg pulling ” the squire broke out  “i shan’t go on  if
you’re going to make the whole thing into a farce ”

sir clinton apologised 

“sorry  you took the wrong meaning out of what i said  but don’t let’s
waste time over it  please go ahead  squire ”

only partly mollified  wendover continued his analysis 

“the next thing is the burglary  that was obviously a case of getting
at some document belonging to neville shandon  you remember the
fragment of notes for his cross examination that was found in his
hand? they got some of his stuff  but clearly they suspected that he
might have more notes  so they burgled his room to see if they could
find anything further ”

this time sir clinton showed no desire to criticise 

“right! on the face of it  the burglary and the murder of neville
shandon fit together  but the trouble is that the commission of the
burglary would show that it was neville they were after  and hence
make the murder of roger useless as a blind  i merely point out the
snag  i’m not trying to carp  squire ”

wendover thought for a minute or more in silence  then he produced a
reply 

“the two murders were part of a pre devised scheme  as i suggested 
but afterwards  the murderer found he hadn’t got the documents
complete  he had to get them if possible  so he took the risk of the
burglary giving the show away ”

sir clinton admitted the possibility of such a case 

“but now what about the attack on ernest shandon  how does that fit
in?”

“what’s one murder more or less to a man who has two on his soul
already? the attack on ernest may have been an extra blind  simply 
like the murder of roger shandon  suppose they’d got ernest this
afternoon  wouldn’t that have tangled the business up still further?”

“admitted  of course  and really friend ernest would hardly have been
missed  is that all the theory you have on the point?”

wendover was rather doubtful about putting forward his second choice 

“it might have been a practical joke  of course  someone with a sense
of humour rather out of gear might have had a grudge against the
little beast and  knowing he was an arrant coward  they might have
stirred him up without meaning to do him any real harm—just used an
ordinary air gun dart ”

he looked at sir clinton suspiciously 

“you yourself didn’t waste much worry over him  it seemed to me  i
thought at the time that you were taking it as a practical joke 
somehow ”

“a very practical joke ” sir clinton said  but he kept every tinge of
expression out of his voice when he made the comment 

“now we can go on to the identity of hackleton’s agent ” wendover
resumed  “you say it was some one who knew the shandons by sight  it
must have been someone who had leave to come and go at will through
the whistlefield grounds  or else someone who landed on the
river bank  that limits things down a good deal  roger shandon didn’t
encourage strangers to roam about his place  the gardeners had orders
to turn out anyone who ventured in  unless they were going up to the
house on business  no stranger or neighbour—bar costock—was on the
premises so far as is known  i came across one of the gardeners and he
told me that ”

sir clinton had no hesitation in confirming this 

“that agrees with all my men have been able to make out ”

“then ” wendover proceeded  “we’re limited down to the people at the
house  the staff of the place  and costock ”

“go on ” sir clinton encouraged him 

wendover pulled a notebook from his pocket and consulted some figures
which he had jotted down at the time he heard the original evidence 

“if you take the facts as we know them ” he went on  “it’s clear that
neville shandon could not have reached the maze before 3 37 p m   and
the second murder was over before 4 5 p m  as a matter of fact  the
times really allow less margin than that  for neville’s body was found
at 3 52 p m  and both were probably dead by that time ”

“i think that’s quite demonstrable on torrance’s evidence ” sir
clinton admitted 

“that means then that the murderer left the maze at some time not much
earlier than four o’clock  since miss forrest heard him in the maze
after neville’s body was found by torrance at 3 52 p m ”

“most probable on the face of it ”

“then if you find someone in such a position that they could not have
been in the maze at 4 p m   they’re cleared ”

“true ”

wendover produced from a cupboard an ordnance survey map of the
district 

“let’s take each person in turn and see if we can establish their
positions during the afternoon ”

“i can help you there ” sir clinton volunteered  “i got most of it in
the police reports  they were busy on that very point ”

wendover nodded and began without more ado 

“sylvia hawkhurst  she was out paying a call  wasn’t she?”

“yes ” sir clinton explained  “she and friend ernest went off in the
car from the house at about eighteen minutes past three  at a quarter
to four—just about the moment when the murders occurred—she was in a
shop buying shoe laces  that precludes any chance of her having used
the car to get back to the maze at the critical time  after that she
paid a call on some friends and stayed with them until she came back
home after six o’clock ”

“what about ernest shandon?”

sir clinton smiled 

“miss hawkhurst dropped him at the east gate as she passed out  it’s
about two and a half miles to the east gate  and she says she was
driving about fifteen miles an hour—it’s a narrow road  you remember 
that means she dropped him at the east gate at about 3 30  it’s the
best part of two miles back to the maze  friend ernest could hardly
have walked it in fifteen minutes  could he? and he’s not much of a
runner  to judge by his condition this morning  as a matter of fact 
his story’s completely confirmed by other evidence  my men interviewed
the driver of the post cart  at 4 20 he came upon ernest squatting by
the roadside  about a mile along the public road  into which the east
gate leads  it’s a place where there’s a little wood  easily
identifiable  friend ernest was sitting there with his boot off 
damning the nail that had hurt him ”

wendover looked at his map 

“that clears him  i can see the wood  it’s the only one that abuts on
the road in that stretch  now what about arthur?”

“we’ve only his own word for his movements  he certainly set out for
the spinney  but that’s all one can say ”

wendover scanned his map once more 

“the spinney’s only a mile from the maze in a direct line  he might
have cut across and got away again  and no one would be any wiser  he
had all the afternoon for the affair ”

his face clouded 

“somehow  i don’t think he was responsible  clinton ”

sir clinton made no direct reply 

“he was hardly a likely agent for hackleton to fix on  at any rate ”
he observed 

“well  let’s get on  what about the gardeners?”

“two of them were working in a field about a mile from the maze all
afternoon  each clears the other ”

“and the third gardener who was on the spot that day—the man skene?”

“his story is that he was working in the kitchen garden near the
house  there’s no evidence against that ”

“the maids? and the chauffeur?”

“all accounted for  they had nothing to do with the affair ”

“and stenness?”

wendover looked keenly at sir clinton as he brought out the
secretary’s name  but the chief constable showed no sign of special
interest 

“stenness?” he repeated  “stenness was undoubtedly at the house at
twenty to five  or thereabouts  for miss forrest saw him when she came
back ”

“then he’d plenty of time to be down at the maze at the critical
period and get home to the house again while torrance and miss forrest
were wandering about in the labyrinth?”

“he had ” sir clinton agreed  gravely 

“he’d have been the ideal agent for hackleton ” wendover pursued  “and
if ernest’s not got the wind up about nothing—which is always
possible  of course—stenness would be worth watching ”

“he is being watched ” sir clinton assured him  and then seemed to
regret his confidence 

wendover  however  seized on the point at once 

“ah! so after all your criticisms it seems you believe in my original
theory!”

“i’ve forgotten which that was  by this time ” sir clinton admitted 
“what was it?”

the squire was rather nettled 

“you poured scorn on it at the time  what i said was this  suppose
hackleton hired a man to put neville shandon out of the way  you say
that was a local man  according to some evidence which you haven’t
divulged to me  very good  if he was a local man  he might have had
access to roger shandon’s private papers  his cheque book  and so
forth  when he was hired for the neville shandon business  he may have
decided to make a bit extra by forgery  and cover it up by the second
murder  two murders are as cheap as one  when it comes to pay for
them  and roger’s murder has confused the trail very considerably 
it’s only a question of identifying the man who could have managed all
that without going too much out of his way and attracting attention ”

sir clinton had been listening carefully to wendover’s exposition 

“that’s very neat indeed ” he conceded  “it would certainly hold
water  if it fitted all the facts that you know  squire  but
unfortunately it leaves out of account the most interesting fact of
all ”

“and that is?” wendover demanded  with some asperity  he was annoyed
to find that he had overlooked something 

“that is the most interesting fact of all ” sir clinton assured him
blandly  then  with a change of tone  “and that’s all i’m able to say
just now  squire  i’ve no fault to find with your reasoning  it hangs
together beautifully  but sometimes the human mind  if you follow me 
is apt to assume connections where no such things exist in nature 
we’ve got an instinctive craving to trace associations between sets of
phenomena—and at times we kid ourselves that there is some
relationship when really it’s only a case of simultaneity ”

“you’ve been reading one of these shilling manuals lately ” said
wendover suspiciously  “‘how to be a philosopher in ten minutes ’ or
something like that  all this gay talk about simultaneity and
phenomena and association comes straight from there  you can’t deceive
me with a veneer of learning ”

“well  i won’t dazzle you with further extracts  let’s get back to
business  go on with your list ”

“young torrance ” wendover continued  “he’s a possible agent  i don’t
know about his financial circumstances  he may be hard up  for all i
know  and amenable to the cash bait that hackleton could offer  it
would be a pretty big one  young torrance was the person who proposed
that game in the maze to miss forrest  that would give him a
reasonable excuse for being in the maze at that particular time  and
further  it would ensure that he was free from the girl’s supervision
at the critical moment  could you have invented a neater dodge
yourself if you’d been set to it?”

“no ” sir clinton admitted  frankly  “i doubt if i could ”

“take another point ” wendover pursued his line of reasoning with
increased interest  “what evidence have we that there ever was a third
individual in the maze at all? torrance’s statements  but if torrance
was the murderer himself  of course he’d insist that a third person
was present  miss forrest’s story of someone running in the maze  but
that may have been torrance himself  you remember that she found it
most difficult to tell the direction from which sounds came when she
was in the maze ”

“that’s a theory that might take some upsetting  squire  if you can
explain just one point  what did torrance do with his air gun after
he’d finished with it? no air gun was found in the maze after the
business  the murderer got rid of it somehow ”

“i see no great difficulty there ” wendover pointed out at once  “look
at the time miss forrest spent in wandering up and down in the maze 
unable to find her way out  if torrance knew the labyrinth  he could
easily make his way through it  get out to the river bank  chuck his
gun into the water  and sprint back again into the maze before she
noticed his absence ”

he thought for a moment before adding 

“in fact  i don’t see why he mayn’t have got rid of the gun in the
interval between the last murder and the moment he gave the alarm—the
time when he shouted out that he’d found the body ”

he paused again  then a further flash of insight threw a fresh light
on the case 

“why  of course  that would account for the running man  he would be
rushing to the river bank and back again as quick as he could go  for
the essential thing would be to get rid of the gun before anyone met
him in the maze ”

sir clinton had dropped all his air of superior criticism 

“that’s remarkably neat  squire  i shouldn’t be surprised if it
doesn’t touch the root of the business—at one or two points  at the
least ”

curiously enough  the chief constable’s comment produced a complete
change in wendover’s mental outlook  he had fallen upon the
whistlefield case with all the enthusiasm of the irresponsible
amateur  the mystery of it had caught his imagination  and he had
thrown himself into the chase for a solution with an eagerness which
he had hardly realised himself  he felt no more responsibility than if
he had been attempting to follow clues in a detective story  even the
characters involved in the affair failed to give him any particular
emotional background  he had never been intimate with the shandon
group  and some of the party he had not so much as seen before the
tragedy occurred  consequently  though he had used the real names of
the various people concerned in the affair  they had borne no more
significance than if he had said “mr  x” or “mr  y ” the atmosphere in
which he had worked had been that of a chess problem rather than an
affair in real life 

and now  at sir clinton’s change of attitude  he caught a glimpse of a
fresh side  it seemed that the line of thought which he had suggested
might lead to something definite  it was no longer a case of idle
speculation about the criminality of mr  x or the guilt of mr  y 
instead  it was a question whether that rather decent young fellow
howard torrance was going to find his neck in a noose one of these
fine mornings  his own speculations might be the starting point for a
fresh line of detection  it came upon him with something of oppression
that in his position with regard to sir clinton  his speculations
might be put to practical use  situated as he was  it was hardly so
irresponsible a position as he had supposed 

but at this point in his train of thought a fresh idea occurred to
him 

“clinton said he knew who the murderer is  so my speculations don’t
matter much  but it would have been a bad business if i’d turned
suspicion on young torrance  he might have had a lot of difficulty in
clearing himself  if clinton had taken up that line ”

sir clinton broke in at this moment 

“you don’t suspect miss forrest  i suppose!”

“no ”

all the amusement had gone out of the game  so far as wendover was
concerned  but sir clinton seemed to have no inkling of this  and
pursued his way through the list 

“then that leaves costock ” he pointed out 

“i don’t think costock did it ” wendover declared  he felt inclined to
turn his criticism into the other camp now  “what have you against
costock? can you bring any evidence to show that he had curare in
hand? or that he had an air gun? or even that he was in the maze at
all at the time of the murders?”

“if that’s your line ” said sir clinton  with a non committal gesture 
“we’ll say no more about it  i’ll look after costock  now there’s one
name left—ardsley  you’d better leave ardsley to me  squire  you’re
far too apt to see red on that subject  you couldn’t produce an
unbiased view of him if you tried ”

“have you any evidence about his movements that afternoon?” wendover
asked  perfunctorily 

sir clinton also seemed to have grown tired of the business 

“you’ll find ardsley’s name pretty prominent in the whistlefield
business when it’s all cleared up  i think  but i’m not prepared at
present to say exactly what his part in the affair may turn out to be
in the end ”

wendover was only too glad to let the matter rest at this point 
irresponsible speculation is one thing  speculation which may lead up
to a death sentence is something quite different  suppose his
ingenious reasoning—he had to admit that some of it was ingenious—were
to lead to a wrongful conviction? he hadn’t quite seen it in that
light before  it was all very well for clinton to go in for
theorising  it was his job to find the criminal and convict him  but
wendover had begun to feel that it was hardly for an amateur to step
in and take a hand  why  already he had light heartedly thrown out
suspicions against several people  and obviously some  at least  of
these suspicions must be baseless  he would keep out of the field in
future  he resolved 

but there was still one point in connection with the whistlefield case
which had given him a good deal of perplexity  it threw no suspicion
on anyone  he decided to clear it up if possible 

“there’s one thing i’ve been thinking over ” he began  “why did you
pretend you’d forgotten those darts on the museum mantelpiece  when
all the time you’d left them there deliberately? you acted the part
pretty well  clinton  you took me in completely at the first rush  i
thought it was real vexation over a genuine mistake  but when i’d had
time to think about it  i saw plainly enough that you’d done it on
purpose  you’re not the sort that makes silly mistakes of that kind ”

sir clinton came out of his reserve at once 

“i’m not fooling now  squire ” he said gravely  “i’m absolutely
serious  i’ve staked my main case on that affair  i’m not able to tell
you how or why at present  but you mustn’t breathe a word about it to
a living soul   no matter what happens next  ”

wendover  in that moment  had a glimpse of a rarely displayed side of
sir clinton’s character  it convinced him  without further argument 

“very good  nobody will learn it from me ”

“you may find it pretty difficult to hold your tongue  squire  but i
trust you to do it  the temptation will probably be very strong before
long  i’m hoping for the best  but i warn you that i’m expecting some
pretty black work at whistlefield before we’re through with this
business  i couldn’t help seeing the funny side of ernest shandon’s
affair  but the next one may not have much fun about it  you can take
my word for it that tragedy’s in the wings  now  waiting for its cue 
so   no matter what happens   keep a tight grip on your tongue  you’re
the only one who could spot that i was acting then  nobody at
whistlefield knows anything about me  they took me for a blundering
idiot  and that’s precisely what i wanted ”



chapter xii 

the fourth attack

“i see the coroner’s jury brought in a verdict of wilful murder
against some person or persons unknown ” wendover remarked  “i suppose
it’s the only verdict that would fit the case  they seemed to think
you’d been rather slack in not having it all cut and dried for them 
clinton  quite obviously they wanted the murderer’s head on a charger 
and they were disappointed when you couldn’t produce the article ”

“i think they were disappointed that we hadn’t given them more
evidence than we did ” sir clinton suggested with a certain
indifference in his tone  “they seemed to imagine that the whole
affair had been got up for their amusement—so that half of them could
take on the post of sherlock on the pounce  they can pounce away to
their heart’s content if they wish  i’m not stopping them  but it
isn’t my business to supply them with spring boards  though they
seemed to think so  all i wanted was to get the formalities through
without too much jaw  and the coroner  decent man  saw to that for
me ”

“what about your own swoops and pounces  before you wax ironical about
these unfortunate yokels? it doesn’t seem to me that you’ve got very
much farther than they’ve done  after all  what about it  clinton?”

sir clinton laughed teasingly 

“the hackleton case is dragging along still ” he said  with the
obvious intention of changing the subject  “shandon’s junior isn’t
making much out of it  so far as i can see  old man hackleton has
every reason to be content with the removal of neville shandon  he’s
having it all his own way in the case now—far too clever for the poor
barrister  he’ll get off scot free  or i’m much mistaken ”

wendover refused to be led away on this fresh trail 

“seriously ” he said  “you don’t seem to be doing much on this
whistlefield case  you’ve just been loafing about these last few
days ”

sir clinton did not defend himself  in fact  he went out of his way to
underline wendover’s complaint 

“and to night i’m actually dragging you off to play bridge at
whistlefield  eh? well  the invitation didn’t originate with me  it
came from miss hawkhurst  i admit that i angled for it in a somewhat
unprincipled way—gave her to understand that the company of a sour old
bachelor was getting on my nerves here  that i’d welcome a little
bright feminine society  and that the society of herself and miss
forrest had just the very kind of brightness that the case needed ”

“she must have felt flattered!” wendover commented ironically 

“oh  of course it was put in my most delicate vein ”

then sir clinton became suddenly serious 

“i’m not very happy in mind about things  squire  and i want to get a
footing in that house apart from purely professional visits  hence the
angling  otherwise  the thing would be in the worst of taste  i quite
admit ”

wendover pricked up his ears 

“are you expecting more trouble even now? nothing’s happened       ”

“since the last time? no  it’s rather a curious point which you may
have noticed  squire  nothing ever does happen between the last time
and the next time  that i should say was an almost invariable rule in
life ”

“you evidently lost the chance of a good job when the sibyls went out
of business ” said wendover in a disappointed tone  “you could have
written up their books for them in the very best style  you’re a past
master in the art of seeming to say something important and really
saying nothing whatever ”

“it often comes in useful ” said sir clinton  “but why say anything at
all? it seems just about the time when we ought to be starting for
whistlefield  suppose we take the hint ”

he refused to discuss the whistlefield case during the drive across 
or even to give wendover an inkling of why he wished to get a footing
in the house at all  the squire was not quite satisfied  to him  it
appeared rather like a breach of hospitality for them to go there with
anything in their minds beyond the game for which they had been
invited  he disliked the idea of sir clinton driffield introducing his
 alter ego  the chief constable into a neighbour’s house by this
indirect method 

when they arrived they found only four of the whistlefield party
awaiting them  arthur hawkhurst was busy with the loud speaker  from
which he was evoking weird oscillation notes in the course of his
endeavours to pick up different stations  ernest shandon was sitting
drowsily in a corner of the room  and wendover noticed with distaste
that he had a spirit decanter and syphon on a table beside him  as the
chief constable and wendover were announced  sylvia came forward 

“so glad you’ve come  sir clinton  we’re looking forward to some
decent bridge       ”

a weird howl from the loud speaker drowned the remainder of her words 
ernest lifted himself from his chair with an effort and approached
them 

“are you much of a bridge player?” he inquired apathetically  “i never
cared enough for the game to do much good  it’s such a lot of trouble 
you know  all this business of struggling for the declaration  and all
that  and if one gets keen on it one’s apt to get very keen  and
perhaps then one spends a lot of time over it  and one might spend
that time in other ways  perhaps better  don’t you think? but perhaps
you like it? some people do ”

“uncle was never a rap of good at it ” sylvia explained with a faint
suspicion of a smile  “so naturally he doesn’t like it  same as the
non dancing man who can’t dance  you know ”

“now stenness is a good player ” ernest went on  “and i can’t think
why he finds it amusing  he’s got all the cards docketed in his head 
you know  just like a lot of papers in pigeon holes  that seems to me
too much like work—making a toil of pleasure and all that sort of
thing  but to night he won’t be playing  he’s busy in the study with
some papers i asked him to look over  and torrance is practising shots
in the billiard room  so he won’t be playing  either  arthur! are you
going to play?”

arthur looked up crossly from his task 

“no!” he snapped  “can’t you see this affair’s gone out of gear and
i’m trying to put it right?”

another shriek from the instrument emphasised his words 

sylvia put her hands over her ears 

“will you be long over it  arthur?” she demanded  “these howls are
terrible ”

“can’t you see i’m doing the best i can?” her brother retorted
snappishly  “there’s nothing so aggravating as to have someone
standing over one the whole time asking  ‘will it be all right soon?’
and ‘when do you think you’ll have it in order?’ or ‘d’you know what’s
wrong with it?’ i’m doing the best i can with the thing ”

sylvia was evidently used to her brother’s outbreaks of temper  with a
slight gesture she reassured arthur that he would not be interrupted
again  and then she turned to getting the bridge table arranged  she
and wendover were to play sir clinton and vera forrest 

“i don’t care much for this room at this time of the evening ” she
said  as she took the cards from their box  “the window’s almost level
with the ground  and that bank of rhododendrons is so close that it
blocks the best part of the view ”

“not much view left at this time of night  miss hawkhurst ” wendover
said  glancing out  “the dusk’s so deep that one can hardly see
anything in it now ”

ernest who had been shuffling about the room in an aimless fashion for
a few moments suddenly uttered a complaint 

“it’s very stuffy in here  don’t you find it so  sir clinton? and you 
miss forrest? it’s a rather hot night  very close  i do like fresh
air  they sometimes laugh at me and call me a fresh air fiend  you
know  but i do like a breath of fresh air  anybody object to the
window being opened a bit from the bottom? let some cooler air in
here  then ”

sylvia looked up from her game 

“we’re right in front of the window  uncle  perhaps some of us might
object to possible draughts ”

but ernest refused to allow his desires to be side tracked in this
way 

“you don’t object  miss forrest? no? and you people don’t  either? you
see  sylvia  nobody minds  i’ll just open it a bit ”

he went forward and threw open the lower sash to its highest range 

“there! that’s much better!” he ejaculated  as he retired to his
corner again  “it won’t get so stuffy now  that’ll be a great
improvement  you’ll see  i never could stand stuffy rooms  i
remember      ”

whatever he remembered was drowned by the loud speaker  arthur had at
last completed his repairs and the jazz music of the machine filled
the room 

“there! that’s all right now ” the mechanic announced at the pitch of
his voice in an endeavour to make himself heard  “i’ll just leave it
on  if you don’t mind  i want to see if it’s properly fixed up ”

he left the room unobserved by the bridge players  who were intent on
their game  ernest gave a sour look at the loudspeaker  and after
bearing it with obvious distaste for some minutes  he also rose 

“i’m going into the winter garden ” he explained  as he passed the
bridge table  “i can’t stand the racket that machine makes  it makes
my head ache  it gives me a regular piercing pain in the ear to sit
near it  i’ll just rest quietly in the winter garden and come back
again when arthur’s finished with his tinkering at the affair ”

he stooped over sir clinton’s shoulder and added in an undertone 

“i’ve been very careful lately  i’ve taken your advice and kept inside
the house as much as possible—so as to run no unnecessary risks  you
know ”

he nodded with the air of one who confirms a weighty decision and
lumbered off out of the room  leaving sir clinton staring after him 

“my advice!” the chief constable reflected with a certain dry
amusement  “well  i like his cheek in foisting that on to my
shoulders!”

wendover was glad that the bridge precluded much conversation  he felt
that sir clinton had drawn him into a false position that evening  and
he had to exert himself so as not to betray his feelings in the
matter  once they sat down  however  the play turned out very even 
and he had not much mental energy left for anything beyond his game 
which tended to reconcile him to his visit  both the girls played
better than the average  and he was beginning to forget his
dissatisfaction as time went on 

“that’s game and rubber ” said sir clinton  at length  as he looked up
from the marker lying beside him 

sylvia glanced at her wrist watch 

“shall we play another?” she asked  “there’s plenty of time  unless
you wish to get away early ”

as she spoke she stretched out her arm to lift the marker  but in the
middle of the gesture she gave a sharp cry of pain and started up from
her chair  then  as she mechanically brought her hand down again on to
the table  wendover saw a spurt of blood from her right wrist  and  at
its source  the brown feathering of one of the poisoned darts embedded
in her white skin 

for an instant the group around the bridge table was stricken into
immobility  while the blood jetted from sylvia’s wrist and stained the
cards across which her hand had fallen  the swift incursion of tragedy
upon the scene had taken them unawares  a moment or two earlier they
had been sitting in safety  intent upon their game  then  out of the
night the tiny missile had sped to its mark  and the king of terrors
had come among them  there had not even been the warning of the
air gun’s report  for it must have been drowned by the noise of the
loudspeaker which still continued to pour out its incongruous flood of
dance music 

wendover frozen in his chair  took in the scene almost without knowing
that he was observing it  the pain shot face of sylvia  the horror in
vera forrest’s eyes  the trickle of blood across the littered cards 
and the cool visage of sir clinton as he leaned over the table towards
the wounded girl  then  as he watched  sylvia’s expression changed 
she had seen the poisoned dart in her wrist and now she understood
what it meant  her lips opened as though saying something  then her
face grew suddenly white  and she slipped back in her chair 

sir clinton rose swiftly and lifted the unconscious girl across the
room to one of the couches  wendover noticed that  even in the haste 
the chief constable took care to use his own body as a shield  keeping
it between sylvia and the window until he had reached a point which
seemed out of range of the assassin 

“after the brute  wendover!” sir clinton ordered  raising his voice
above the clamour of the loud speaker  “you may be able to spot him
before he gets clear away  and shut that window behind you ”

galvanised into action by the curt directions  wendover suddenly
ceased to be a mere spectator  without a word he swung himself through
the open window and out into the darkness  somewhere in the gloom  the
unknown murderer must be lurking  waiting perhaps to make sure of his
victim with a second shot  wendover was filled with an anger wholly
alien to his usual temperament  and he peered eagerly into the
obscurity around him in the hope of glimpsing a shadow moving among
the shades 

the murder of the two shandons and the attack upon ernest had left him
emotionally untouched to any real extent  the two shandons had been
hard men  from all he knew of them  and the fate which had overtaken
them did not seem altogether out of keeping with people of their type 
the attempt on ernest had been unsuccessful and had made little
impression on wendover’s feelings  but this last outrage was in a
different category  even yet he could hardly realise that a deadly
effort had been made to injure sylvia  sylvia! it was hardly possible
for him to feel sure that anyone would attempt to bring down a girl in
that terrible fashion  a man  somehow  was different  but he revolted
against the idea of cutting short a life like sylvia’s  the
aimlessness of it seemed appalling to his mind  and his anger against
the hidden assassin rose to a white heat 

he moved forward in the direction from which he supposed the shot had
come  but in a few steps he ran right into the belt of rhododendrons
which stretched parallel with the house on this front  as he did so 
the loud speaker was suddenly shut off and he halted to listen for
sounds of movement  nothing seemed to be stirring  he circled about
the rhododendrons  but found no one there 

he retraced his steps towards the window  a single dim light shone at
the other end of the winter garden  but except for it the house front
was dark  the bridge table showed every detail under the lamps of the
room beyond the window—an ideal target for the eye of anyone posted in
the darkness 

suddenly wendover’s eyes were dazzled by a blaze of light as the whole
of the winter garden lamps were switched on 

“i say ” demanded a cautious voice  “what does all this mean? what’s
all this about  i say? who are you  out there?”

wendover’s eyes  after an instant or two  grew accustomed to the
glare  looking towards the speaker  he saw ernest shandon’s figure at
the nearest door of the winter garden  ernest evidently meant to run
no risks  for he was holding the door almost closed and had taken
shelter behind it while he called out his demand for explanations 
wendover’s lips curled contemptuously as he noted the shrinking figure
under the lights 

“i’m wendover ” he announced 

ernest opened the door another inch  though with manifest reluctance 

“what’s it all about?” he reiterated  with almost pathetic anxiety 
“is there any danger? what are you running around like this for?
where’s driffield? what’s happened? can’t you answer  man?”

wendover was still more disgusted by the obvious poltroonery of the
man who was  nominally at least  his host 

“miss hawkhurst has been shot with one of those poisoned darts  come
along and see if there’s anything we can do ”

ernest was quite evidently reduced to the last stage of moral
prostration by the news  he had not even sufficient nerve left to
cover up his cowardice 

“eh? what’s that? come out there and be shot at myself? i won’t!”

“well  stay there  then!” wendover growled  continuing his way back to
the window through which he had come 

“i tell you what i’ll do ” he heard ernest’s voice again  “i’ll go
into the house by the other door of the winter garden and come round
to where you are  i’ll be under cover the whole way if i do that ”

the sound of the winter garden door closing and the turning of the key
in the lock came to wendover’s ears as he reopened the window and
climbed through  shutting it behind him 

sylvia was still lying on the couch  evidently unconscious  sir
clinton was beside her and  much to wendover’s surprise  some lint and
bandages had been laid out on the bridge table which had been pulled
across the room 

“miss forrest ” the chief constable said curtly  “will you bring some
warm water? get it yourself  these maids are no use in an emergency 
and tell them to get miss hawkhurst’s room ready for her—immediately 
a hot water bottle as quick as they can—and some brandy ”

vera was so quick that she had to pause at the door for his last
directions 

“you wendover ” went on sir clinton  “get ardsley on the ’phone at
once  tell him i want him here at whistlefield ”

wendover halted for a moment 

“hadn’t i better tell him what he’s wanted for? he may be able to
bring something with him ”

“it’s all arranged  damnation man!  will  you hurry up!”

wendover  electrified by the vehemence of the tone  hurried off
without a word  when he returned he found that vera forrest had
carried out her instructions and had come back to see if anything more
could be done  ernest had also found his way into the room and stood
staring vacantly at the form of his niece lying so limply on the
couch  he was evidently about to open his mouth when sir clinton
looked up 

“everything all right? thanks  miss forrest  you got ardsley 
wendover? good so far  then ”

he was busy bathing the wound with warm water as he spoke 

“there’s just a chance we may be able to do something ” he explained 
going on with his task  “by the merest luck  the dart hit the chain of
her watch bracelet  it got down between the links and made a nasty
wound all the same  but it didn’t quite embed itself in the flesh  so
there’s just the chance that the dose of poison injected may not reach
the fatal amount  i can’t say  ardsley will know better when he
arrives ”

he bathed the wound again  then turned to wendover 

“you saw no one?”

wendover shook his head 

“it’s practically pitch dark to night  i could see nothing ”

sir clinton thought for a moment 

“you’ll find a flash lamp in my overcoat pocket  get it  wendover  and
hunt round that bank of rhododendrons to see if you can find the
air gun  the brute may have dropped it in the hurry  this time  don’t
mind if you make a mess—the gun’s more important than any tracks you
may obscure in your search ”

as wendover moved towards the door  ernest seemed to come to life 

“i suppose i ought to help ” he said  “but it seems to me taking a
needless risk  sending anyone out into the dark like that  for all we
know the fellow may be out there yet  with his gun  i don’t think
anyone should go  i’m not going ” he concluded simply 

sir clinton glanced up for a moment and scanned ernest with eyes that
made no effort to conceal their contempt 

“i didn’t ask you to volunteer  go on  wendover  i’ll come and give
you a hand as soon as ardsley arrives ”

as wendover turned to leave the room stenness’s figure appeared at the
door  it was evident that the secretary had been put on the alert by
the hurrying to and fro in the house  and had come to see what was
amiss  but apparently he had had no inkling of the real state of
affairs  wendover saw him glance from one to another in the room until
at last his eyes lighted upon the limp figure of sylvia stretched on
the couch  then a flash of expression crossed his features  something
which betrayed an intense emotion  but wendover  at the moment  was
unable to interpret it  he stored it up in his memory for future
consideration  and then left the room 

“and now ” said sir clinton  “i think we’d better take miss hawkhurst
up to her room  we can manage it well enough  and she’d better be
there rather than here when she comes to herself again ”

under his directions this was carried out  on reaching sylvia’s room 
sir clinton looked round and then  going over to the window  he
endeavoured to scan the surroundings  but it was obviously too dark to
see much 

“i think we’ll shift this bed ” he suggested  when he came back  “it
had better be brought over into this corner  then there will be no
possibility of any shot reaching it from the window  one never
knows      ”

he paused for a moment 

“now i think miss forrest and i had better wait here till miss
hawkhurst comes out of her faint  or at any rate till dr  ardsley
turns up  but we mustn’t have a crowd here just now ”

his manner  rather than his words  cleared the room of his late
assistants  and he and vera forrest were left alone  sir clinton 
after feeling sylvia’s pulse  succeeded in giving her a few drops of
brandy  soon she stirred faintly  sir clinton left the bedside and
returned to the window  down below  at a short distance  he could see
wendover busy with the flash lamp  quite obviously he had not yet
found anything 

as sir clinton turned away from the window vera forrest beckoned him
aside 

“what do you think  sir clinton? is there any chance of her getting
over it?”

sir clinton’s grave face showed the anxiety which was at work in his
mind 

“i really can’t say anything  miss forrest  for i don’t know anything 
the wound isn’t as deep as in the other cases  that’s always
something  she hasn’t collapsed immediately  as her uncles did  that’s
something also  but we’ll need to wait for dr  ardsley  and even when
he comes  i doubt if we shall learn much  he’ll at least be able to
give her any special treatment that there is  we can only hope for the
best ”

it was clear from his tone that he did not take a light view of the
case  he had hardly ceased speaking when they heard the sound of
someone racing up the stair  the door was opened brusquely  and sir
clinton had just time to interpose himself when arthur hawkhurst came
into the room  the boy was evidently in high excitement  he had
learned of the affair downstairs and had rushed up on the spur of the
moment 

“’sh!” said sir clinton  angrily  “don’t break in here like a wild
bull!”

he led the boy gently outside into the hall 

“your sister has been shot at like your uncles ” he explained  “so
far  the thing hasn’t killed her  but you needn’t take any optimistic
view  i’ve sent for dr  ardsley  he knows about that poison  and
perhaps he may be able to do something ” arthur seemed unable to
control his excitement 

“but who’d do a thing like that?” he demanded 

“don’t make a row ” sir clinton ordered  bluntly  “we can’t stand here
holding a committee meeting  there’s plenty of time for discussion
later on  she’s just coming out of a faint—at least it looks like
that  shock of seeing what had hurt her  no doubt  was what sent her
off  nothing to be done now until ardsley comes        ah  here he is 
now  hawkhurst  we’ll go  and leave the expert to the business ”

ardsley was ascending the stair  carrying a bag with him  he nodded a
curt greeting to the two at the head of the stair  gave another
interrogative nod as if inquiring which room he should enter  and then
disappeared  closing the door behind him  arthur seemed amazed that
sir clinton had said nothing as the doctor passed 

“aren’t you going to tell him about it?” he demanded anxiously 

“he knows all about it ” sir clinton assured him  but he added no
explanations  “one moment  before we go ”

he waited for a minute or two  then the door of sylvia’s room reopened
and ardsley came out  his ordinarily impassive face had an expression
of unusual gravity  and in answer to sir clinton’s interrogation he
shook his head doubtfully 

“one can’t tell ” was all he would vouchsafe  “get these nurses at
once ”

and with this he turned on his heel and re entered the room 

sir clinton put his hands into his pockets and stood for a moment or
two as though lost in thought  then suddenly coming to life again  he
made his way to the telephone box  where he shook himself free from
arthur on the plea of an urgent call 

when he had given his message through the telephone  the chief
constable returned to the room in which the attack had been made 
wendover was apparently still busy with his search among the
rhododendrons  vera forrest was with sylvia  but the rest of the
whistlefield group were there  waiting to hear the latest news of the
victim 

ernest shandon’s nerves had evidently suffered severely from this
fresh shock  he was sitting in his original seat at the back of the
room  his head sunk forward and his eyes staring apathetically at the
carpet before him  while in his hand he held a glass of neat whisky
which he had just poured out from the decanter beside him  sir clinton
noticed that the curtains had been drawn in front of the window
through which the attack had been made  and he was not far out in
believing that this precaution was due to ernest  it was  in fact  the
first thing he had done  once he had found leisure for it 

howard torrance and stenness were standing together near the
fire place  howard  manifestly  was still in ignorance of some details
of the tragedy  and he was endeavouring to extract them from stenness
by a series of eager questions  but the secretary  for once  seemed to
have lost his efficiency  he was obviously replying almost at random 
and his whole bearing was that of a man disturbed by a trivial
interruption while in the midst of some intense preoccupation with
another subject  his appearance suggested that of a man suddenly
oppressed by an unexpected and intolerable calamity  sir clinton’s
eyes narrowed as he swept his glance over the secretary’s face 

“he seems to be the most anxious of the lot ” he commented to himself 

arthur hawkhurst had been standing at the window with his back to the
room  but as sir clinton came in he swung round  his face seemed
disfigured by a tumult of emotions  anger  distrust  and anxiety were
clearly written on it 

“well ” he demanded sharply  “can you tell us any more?”

“you heard what ardsley said yourself ” sir clinton pointed out  “i
haven’t seen him since then ”

arthur glared at him with unconcealed fury 

“it’s easy enough to see that it isn’t your sister that’s lying at
death’s door! you mightn’t be so cool about it then ”

he turned back to the window again  and stared out into the night 

“what  has  happened?” howard torrance demanded  “you’re the only one
here who saw it all  sir clinton ”

“someone took advantage of the music from the loudspeaker to steal up
close to the window  there  which mr  shandon insisted on opening  an
air gun dart was fired into the room and struck miss hawkhurst 
luckily  it happened to hit her wrist just where there was some
protection—the chain of her watch bracelet  and that prevented it from
going as deep as it might  but if any poison has got into the wound 
it may be a serious matter—most serious  that’s all i know  except
that i got dr  ardsley over immediately  and he has her in his
charge ”

“is there any hope that it won’t be fatal this time?” howard torrance
asked  anxiously 

sir clinton shook his head 

“i know as little as you do  i got the dart out almost immediately  so
perhaps the poison hadn’t time to get in its work  that seems to offer
some chance of escape  but you’ll need to wait for the expert’s views 
i really know nothing ”

“and you don’t seem to be doing anything ” snarled arthur from the
window 

before sir clinton needed to reply  the door opened and wendover
hurried into the room  he was dishevelled  his tie was loose  and his
dinner jacket showed in some places smears of green and brown which he
had evidently picked up during his prolonged search  but in his hand
he carried the thing sir clinton wanted—the air gun 

“good man!” the chief constable commented  as his eyes rested on the
weapon 

at the exclamation arthur turned back towards the room  his face
changed as he caught sight of the thing that wendover carried 

“where did you get that  eh? that’s my best air gun!”

“that’s the thing that may have killed your sister  then ” said
wendover  looking mistrustfully at arthur’s disturbed face  “i found
it in that clump of rhododendrons out there  it had been jammed right
into the middle of the bushes  that’s why it took so long to find ”

he looked arthur up and down for a moment  then  disregarding the
owner’s outstretched hand  he passed the air gun to sir clinton  who
took it from him without a word  arthur stepped forward angrily as
though to recover his property  but at that moment a fresh
interruption occurred  again the door opened  but this time the grim
figure of ardsley appeared on the threshold  he waited for a moment
until he saw that he had secured the attention of them all  then he
turned towards sir clinton and gave him his verdict 

“this is a bad business! of course  she’s still alive  and there’s a
chance yet  it’s a pity you didn’t think of a tourniquet at the
moment—prevent any risk of the stuff spreading  since it’s an isolated
limb  but there’s no use grumbling now  we can only wait and see if
she pulls through  it’s a bad business!”

sir clinton nodded 

“have you everything you need? the nurses will be here as soon as
possible ”

“miss forrest will do in the meantime  one thing—there must be
absolute quietness in the house  i can’t have my patient disturbed in
the slightest degree  she’s unconscious again  but there must be no
risk of disturbing her later on  complete quiet  or i won’t answer for
anything ”

he turned and left the room without waiting for any questions  the
gravity of his expression was enough to show them that he had no great
hope for sylvia’s safety 



chapter xiii 

the dart

the period immediately following the attack upon sylvia was one of
intense inquietude in wendover’s mind  up to that point he had
persuaded himself that the affairs at whistlefield would eventually
prove to be linked up in some way with the hackleton case  the
connection of some of the incidents—the attack on ernest shandon  for
one—had certainly been obscure  but wendover had nursed an irrational
belief that in the end all the threads would lead back to hackleton 
and that the whole mystery would find a simple explanation which would
bring it within the borders of normal motives and sane sequences of
actions 

the latest tragedy  however  could not be squared with any of his
preconceived ideas  what possible relationship could exist between
hackleton and sylvia which would make her removal essential to the
financier? it was hardly likely that either she or ernest had been the
repository of neville shandon’s secrets 

but if hackleton dropped out of the piece  then the whole affair
seemed to lose any thread of purpose and to become a mere massacre
perpetrated by some being urged on by motives which lay outside the
bounds of reason  instead of a coldly calculating criminal  wendover
seemed to find himself confronted by a creature beyond the pale of
humanity  a thing that slew at random out of sheer lust for death  his
own normal mind revolted from such a monster  and he strove hard to
piece the evidence together again in some way which would eliminate
this nightmare figure and replace it by a criminal actuated by motives
which sane intellects could grasp 

as soon as he got sir clinton alone after the tragedy at whistlefield 
he had done his best to extort information  but in this he had failed
completely  every one of his inquiries was met by a curt denial of any
ulterior knowledge  though it was manifest that sir clinton was
concentrating his whole mind on the latest developments in the
whistlefield affair  despite this blank negation  however  the squire
got the impression that the chief constable’s anxiety centred round
sylvia rather than the whistlefield case as a whole  from an unguarded
word he inferred that sir clinton had  somehow or other  taken a risk 
and that the results had been very different from what he had
expected  something had cut across sir clinton’s schemes and had
shaken his confidence 

even when he abandoned his fruitless inquisition and went to bed 
wendover was unable to free himself from the latest tragedy  his mind
insisted on conjuring up pictures  some of them memories  others
imaginary scenes in which the unknown murderer played his part  he saw
the bridge table at the end of the rubber  with the cards of the last
trick lying still ungathered  sir clinton putting down the marker  a
cigarette smouldering on the ash tray  vera forrest shuffling the pack
for the next deal  nothing could have been more peaceful  then  in a
flash  came the transformation scene  he lived again through the
nightmare moment when the lethal dart sped in upon them from the outer
dark  changing their fancied security into a thing of horror and
peril  and from this his imagination passed to that lurking monster in
the gloom beyond the window  a vague  featureless figure  crouching
among the rhododendrons  lifting the thin barrel of the air gun in
search of the appointed victim  in uneasy visions such as these  his
night dragged slowly on 

morning brought wendover no release from his anxiety  before he had
come downstairs  sir clinton had been busy with the telephone  and his
face was sufficient to show that he had had bad news  wendover hardly
dared to ask what it was  for his guest’s features plainly betrayed
that the worst might be expected 

“ardsley’s been telephoning ” sir clinton explained briefly  “she’s
much worse  there was a bad collapse in the early morning and they
just managed to pull her through  luckily the nurses were on the spot 
so everything was done that could be done  but ardsley seems to have
very little hope now  he thinks the dose of the poison must have been
bigger than we thought ”

he bit his lip  seemed on the verge of saying something else  then
ended by changing his mind and choosing other words  “we must go
across there after breakfast  squire  i must see ardsley  you’ve no
idea how this affair worries me ”

“i think i have a fair notion ” wendover replied  “i’ve had a pretty
bad night over it myself  it’s a damnable affair ”

sir clinton nodded absent mindedly  he was evidently lost in his
thoughts  by the set of his mouth  wendover could guess that they were
anything but pleasant 

though he hardly admitted it to himself  sir clinton’s behaviour was
another factor which had loosened wendover’s grip on the normal world 
hitherto the chief constable had seemed so sure of his case that he
had treated it almost lightly  but now it was self evident that
something had gone wrong  things had not worked out according to plan 
the tragedy which he had predicted had forced itself into being  but
now that it had come he appeared unable to act the part of the  deus
ex machina  which he seemed to have meant to play  this sudden change
disturbed wendover deeply  the man on whom he had been relying to
clear up the mystery appeared to be perplexed and anxious instead of
cool and resolute 

when they reached whistlefield  ernest shandon was the first person
who came to meet them 

“this is a terrible business!” he lamented  as he came into the study
where they were  “it’s a dreadful affair  really  a dreadful affair!
ardsley’s very down about it  very down  you know  he wouldn’t do for
a doctor in practice  he’s most unsympathetic  most doctors are
careful  they don’t blurt things out in the callous sort of way that
ardsley does  he doesn’t think about one’s feelings in the slightest 
one expects a little decent circumlocution from a doctor  but there’s
none of that about him  i asked him this morning if sylvia had passed
a good night  and he just glared at me and snarled that she was lucky
to be alive at all  snarled it out as if she had been one of the dogs
he cuts up  is that the way to break bad news to a relation? i call it
beastly  he never thinks of what it means to us  it’s just a case to
him  i suppose  but look what it means to us  sylvia runs the house so
well  i don’t know what we’ll do without her ”

sir clinton had let him run on  but quite evidently he had no
intention of wasting much time listening to ernest’s lamentations 

“miss forrest must be resting just now  i suppose?”

“yes ” ernest assured him  “she was up helping ardsley until the
nurses came  and after that she didn’t seem able to sleep  so she sat
up for a while  ardsley came down and found her in the early morning 
so he sent her off to bed  so he told me  i had gone to bed myself
some time before ”

sir clinton made no comment and ernest proceeded with his complaints 

“what i feel is that the police aren’t doing anything  why haven’t you
arrested somebody? my nerves are beginning to wear thin under this
strain  i tell you  here we have some murderer haunting the
neighbourhood  he kills my brothers  he attacks me  he brings my niece
to death’s door—and all the time the police look on with their hands
in their pockets  what are they paid for? that’s what i ask you  why
don’t they lay hands on the fellow? what sort of a life do you think
i’m leading just now? every time i go outside the house i have the
feeling that the scoundrel may be lurking behind the next bush 
getting his gun ready  that’s a pretty state of things  and not a
finger do you lift to help!”

“i offered you a guard of constables for whistlefield not so long ago 
mr  shandon  you refused it then  i’m sorry it isn’t available now  i
have other work for my men at present ”

ernest was somewhat taken aback by this reminder 

“so you did  so you did  i’d forgotten that ”

sir clinton seemed inclined to accept this as an apology 

“i should like to see mr  stenness for a moment in private  if you
don’t mind  mr  shandon  could you send him to me?”

ernest evidently felt that he had let his tongue run away with him 
possibly some faint realisation of the display of cowardice which he
had made was dawning upon his mind  at any rate  he hastened to meet
sir clinton’s wish 

“i’ll hunt him up and send him to you ” he announced with surprising
conciseness  and he left the room without further talk 

while they were waiting for stenness the door opened and arthur
hawkhurst came in  rather to wendover’s surprise he showed no trace of
the ill feeling which he had displayed so strongly on the previous
night  instead  he seemed rather shamefaced  and he opened in an
unexpected vein 

“i behaved like a young cub last night  sir clinton ” he admitted
frankly  “i daresay i said a lot of things that i shouldn’t have said 
but you know quite well”—his teeth showed in an engaging smile—“i was
badly upset  anyone might be  i think  poor sylvia! i’m deuced fond of
her  you know  she’s about the only person in the world that matters a
tinker’s curse to me  so naturally i wasn’t quite level headed  and i
daresay i said things i shouldn’t have said ”

“that’s all right ” sir clinton assured him  “i understood perfectly
how you felt  forget it  and don’t worry  you’ve trouble enough
without bothering about trifles just now ”

arthur nodded a gloomy acquiescence 

“have you any notion why the thing was done?”

sir clinton was careful not to give a direct answer 

“we’re doing our best ”

arthur’s eye lighted up 

“i wish you’d let me take a hand  perhaps i could be of some use?”

“not just at present  i’m afraid ”

arthur took the rejection badly 

“nothing to hinder my working on my own  then  is there? you can’t
prevent that  and if i come across the brute you needn’t expect to be
allowed to butt in then  you know  i’ll tackle him myself  hanging’s
too good for him ”

“i agree with you there ” sir clinton said unguardedly  then he added
with a faint smile  “we’re speaking quite unofficially  of course ”

arthur looked up suspiciously 

“i’m not quite sure what you mean  but what  i  mean’s quite plain and
can be put into plain english  if i can lay my hands on the man who
tried to murder sylvia  he’ll wish for a decent hanging before i’m
done with him  i’ll      ”

“that’s enough  mr  hawkhurst ” sir clinton interrupted sharply  “we
don’t want to hear about it ”

arthur’s temper boiled up at the words  wendover  glancing at his
face  saw the features contorted in hardly restrained fury  with an
effort  the boy fought down his anger until he could speak 

“if anything happens to sylvia i’ll get the brute yet  and then he’ll
wish he’d never been born  that’s that!”

he swung round on his heel and left the room 

sir clinton sighed slightly as the door closed 

“oh  lord!” he exclaimed softly  as if to himself  “i hadn’t reckoned
on  that   this is growing devilishly complicated ”

wendover had pricked up his ears 

“what’s the trouble now?”

sir clinton seemed to realise that he had spoken his thoughts aloud 

“it’s another factor that i hadn’t allowed for ” he admitted  but he
refused to divulge anything further  and wendover had to content
himself with the cryptic phrase 

stenness did not keep them waiting long  when he came into the study 
wendover was surprised to see the change which the night seemed to
have made in the secretary’s appearance  he was heavy eyed  and his
features had a drawn expression as though he had passed through some
great strain 

“i suppose we all look a bit like that  after this affair ” wendover
commented to himself  “clinton’s half killing himself with anxiety 
young hawkhurst’s far from normal  and i suppose i must look a bit
white about the gills myself  it’s only to be expected ”

sir clinton wasted no time on preliminaries  but came to the point at
once 

“mr  shandon told us that you knew the contents of roger shandon’s
will  can you give me the gist of it? it’s not a confidential document
now  of course ”

“there’s a copy of it in the safe here ” stenness explained  “you can
look it over if you like ”

“thanks  but if you can remember the main points it may save me the
trouble of reading through it ”

stenness took a key from his pocket and went across to open the safe
which was built into the wall of the study 

“the will’s simple enough  all the property is to be divided equally
between neville shandon  ernest shandon  miss hawkhurst  and arthur
hawkhurst  there’s the usual provision about heirs and survivors of
that group ”

“what i particularly want to know is whether there’s any residuary
legatee mentioned  anybody who takes the remainder of the estate after
all other legacies have been paid in full ”

“i don’t remember any provision of that sort ” stenness admitted 
searching among the papers in the safe  “here’s the copy of the will
if you’d care to look at it ”

he handed it over to sir clinton who unfolded it and began to read 

“he left you nothing  did he?” the chief constable asked casually  as
he continued his study of the document 

stenness was plainly surprised by the question 

“no  why should he? i’ve only been with him a year or two  i’m not an
old family retainer who’s earned a pension  as a matter of fact  there
are no bequests of the kind ”

“so i see ” sir clinton agreed when he had finished his reading  “it’s
a very short will  not complicated by any of the provisions they often
put into these things ”

he seemed to ponder over the matter for a moment or two 

“i had rather expected to find a residuary legatee in the thing
somewhere  but you’re quite right  there’s nothing of the sort
mentioned  you don’t happen to know anything about neville shandon’s
will  do you? it wouldn’t fall into your province ”

stenness shook his head 

“i never read it  but i witnessed it  as it happens  and the
impression i got from a glance at the last page was that it may have
run on the same lines as roger’s  you can easily get a copy of it once
it’s filed  if you need it ”

sir clinton handed back the will and rose to his feet as the secretary
restored the document to the safe 

“i see you have a key of that thing?”

stenness closed the safe and put the key back into his pocket 

“yes  mr  shandon told me to keep this one  i’ve been arranging the
papers for him and it was more convenient that i should have the key 
it saved him the bother of always handing it over when i needed it ”

“you hadn’t a key in roger shandon’s time?”

“no  roger was rather a different sort of person ”

“by the way  mr  stenness  are you staying on here as secretary to
ernest shandon?”

stenness seemed slightly taken aback by the question 

“there’s no definite arrangement  so far  i’m staying until the estate
affairs have been cleared up  but after that i doubt if i shall remain
here  i can do better than this ”

“i suppose you could ” sir clinton agreed indifferently 

he looked at his watch 

“i want to see dr  ardsley now  i’m rather in a hurry at present  but
there are one or two more questions i want to put to you sometime  mr 
stenness  will you be free after dinner to night? very well  i’ll come
across then  now  if you could let dr  ardsley know i’m here ”

stenness was evidently a prompt messenger  for ardsley appeared almost
at once  wendover scanned his face eagerly as he came into the room 
here was the person who might be able to set their minds at ease  but
ardsley’s countenance gave him no cause for raising his spirits  it
betrayed nothing but gloom and anxiety 

“she’s much worse  i’d hoped for a rally after that attack in the
night  but she hasn’t pulled herself together ”

“tell us plainly what you think ” demanded sir clinton  “you needn’t
beat about the bush where we’re concerned ”

ardsley’s face seemed to grow  if anything  graver than before 

“i can hold out no great hope  frankly  i think it will be all up
soon—to night  perhaps ”

no one seemed inclined to speak  wendover was trying to force himself
to face what now seemed inevitable  death often came swiftly  but the
circumstances of sylvia’s tragedy gave it a quality which ordinary
deaths do not possess  he could hardly assure himself that the whole
thing was not a nightmare  there seemed to be something so aimless in
the whole business  the killing of a young girl against whom no one
could conceivably harbour any personal grudge  the inhuman
purposelessness which had cut sylvia down on the threshold of her life
seemed more terrible to him than any planned scheme would have done 
for a calculated crime would imply a motive  whereas this deed seemed
to have arisen out of mere chaos—something outside normal things 

sir clinton took a step towards the door and then seemed to change his
mind 

“do you think you could get some vinegar and some washing soda?” he
asked  turning to ardsley  “there’s something i’d like to be sure
about  and it might be as well that an expert should see it ”

ardsley had no difficulty in procuring what was wanted  as the doctor
in charge of sylvia  he had only to ask for anything  a couple of
tumblers and a water carafe were brought as well  at sir clinton’s
request 

“now you can put your back against the door  squire  we don’t want any
visitors ”

from a tiny glass bottle which he drew from his pocket  the chief
constable extracted one of the ill omened darts 

“this is the one which wounded miss hawkhurst ” he explained  as he
dropped it into a glass of water  “now we’ll need to give it time ”

he stirred it round occasionally  and gradually a faint bluish tinge
communicated itself to the water  ardsley was scrutinising the glass
with deep interest  but his face showed nothing of the thoughts in his
mind 

“now we add a drop of vinegar  squire ” said sir clinton  suiting the
action to the word 

as the vinegar mixed with the solution  wendover saw a change in the
tint—a pale red replaced the original blue 

“now some washing soda  for a change ” said sir clinton  dropping in a
crystal and swirling the liquid round in the glass  as he did so  the
blue tinge returned to the solution 

ardsley nodded approvingly 

“litmus  obviously  that clinches it  you must be a bit of a chemist
to have hit on that tip ”

sir clinton made no reply  but he cautioned wendover to bear the test
in mind 

“if that’s all you want  i’ll go back to miss hawkhurst ” ardsley
said  as soon as sir clinton ceased speaking 

“we’re going back to the grange  now ” sir clinton explained  “if you
need me  you’ve only to ring up ”

“i thought you were in a hurry ” wendover said in some surprise when
he found that sir clinton seemed to have nothing on hand on their
return to the grange  “you broke off your talk with stenness on that
excuse  why not have finished it at the time  instead of trailing over
there again later in the day?”

“i’m worried about miss hawkhurst  squire  and i prefer to get my news
direct from ardsley rather than over the ’phone ”

“you didn’t get much out of him this morning ” wendover complained 
“and i can’t think why you put that man into the business at all  it
seems to me tempting providence  why  he’s quite possibly the source
of the original curare  for all you know  he’s one of the suspects ”

“he’s not on my list of suspects  squire  and if he’s on yours  you
may score him off straight away  that’s definite  as to my using him 
who could do the work better? what would a country g p  make of miss
hawkhurst’s case? nothing whatever! you can’t expect rural medicos to
be the last word in the study of out of the way poisons  it’s not
reasonable to ask it ”

wendover’s increasing disquietude found its relief in speech at last 

“i can’t see what your aim is in this affair  clinton  you say you
know the murderer  why don’t you arrest him at once? you claimed to
know him days ago  and yet you did nothing  and now you’ve let things
drift  and the result has been this attack on sylvia hawkhurst  why 
you’re responsible for that! you were criminally careless with these
poison darts  leaving them lying about for anyone to pick up ”

sir clinton made no defence  instead  he turned wendover’s vehemence
into another channel 

“it’s easy to say ‘arrest somebody!’ suppose you were in my shoes 
squire  and you wanted to be absolutely on the safe side  whom would
you arrest at this very moment?”

under the spur of the direct question  wendover had a flash of
illumination 

“ernest shandon ” he said  “i’ve just been thinking over things  and
i’ve seen one or two points in a fresh light  who was it opened the
window last night and so made it possible for the murderer to shoot
into the room? ernest shandon! who was out of the room when the shot
was fired? ernest shandon! where was he? in the winter garden  which
has a door opening close to the bank of rhododendrons in which the
murderer hid himself  who had access to that stock of curare in the
museum? ernest shandon!”

sir clinton failed to repress a smile  though he did his best 

“and who was attacked himself  in the maze? ernest shandon! and who
was sitting with a nail in his boot on the public highway that
afternoon when his brothers were killed? ernest shandon! let’s
complete the tale  you know  before we begin to talk about arrests 
the real truth of the matter is that ernest shandon has annoyed you by
his cowardice and his general selfishness  and  therefore  you think
he’d be all the better for a hanging  you’re beginning to see red
here  just as you saw red in ardsley’s case ”

wendover sullenly admitted his blunder 

“but there’s another person who ought to be under observation—young
hawkhurst ” he continued  “that young beggar seems to me hardly sane
at times  look at him this morning! that cerebro spinal affair has
affected him far more than i supposed      ”

he broke off  struck by a fresh idea 

“is he the person you have your eye on  clinton? i never thought of
that! now that might account for the thing that’s been puzzling me—the
damned aimlessness of all the whistlefield affair  it’s just the sort
of thing a lunatic would do  and they say that in a sleepy sickness
case  if it turns to homicidal mania  the creature may go for the
nearest relations  just what’s happened at whistlefield! and it was he
who put on the loud speaker last night and so covered any noise he
might have made in getting into position outside the window  i hadn’t
thought of that before  and it was his air gun that i found in the
rhododendrons ”

this time  sir clinton did not smile 

“i don’t mind admitting to you  squire  that young hawkhurst is one of
my difficulties ”

wendover returned to his original charge 

“well  i can’t understand what you’re driving at  clinton  on the face
of things  it seems to me that you’ve gambled away that poor girl’s
life merely to get a case that you can prove  and now you’re no nearer
it than you were before ”

sir clinton’s face grew very grave 

“you’ve touched a sore spot there  squire  but did it never occur to
you that i didn’t expect an attack on miss hawkhurst? what i did
expect was something quite different  didn’t it strike you as peculiar
that i angled for that invitation to play bridge when it obviously
wasn’t the sort of thing that one expects? i had to put on a pretty
tough hide to wangle that with a straight face ”

“yes ” wendover confirmed  “it was a piece of rank bad taste and i was
surprised at your doing it ”

“it was  and i’m not usually celebrated for that kind of thing  don’t
you see what i was driving at  squire? i expected the next attack to
be made on myself—and i took good care to make an opportunity for it
by going on to the murderer’s own ground  the whole bridge party
affair was a plant of mine to make myself a good target for the
air gun expert ”

“my godfathers!” wendover ejaculated in surprise  “i never thought
that was what you were after  you’ve got fair nerves  clinton  to
offer yourself up like that to be shot at ”

“i’d rather take it when i was ready for it than have it
unexpectedly—hence the bridge party  i felt he’d hardly be able to
resist the chance of a sitting shot ”

“h’m! i don’t know that i’d have been able to screw myself up to that
point ”

“of course you would! you didn’t hesitate over the risk of going after
that fellow  through the window ”

“yes ” wendover admitted  “but that was in hot blood  which is rather
different ”

sir clinton brushed this aside 

“the trouble is that i didn’t get what i wanted  after all  miss
hawkhurst was hit  but you may remember that just when the brute
pulled the trigger  she leaned slightly forward and put out her hand 
whilst i happened to lean back  the dart went past you  and it struck
her arm  but i can’t for the life of me be sure whether that was an
accident or not  if i knew whether that shot was meant for me or for
her  i’d know rather more about the case than i do  and i’d be in an
easier frame of mind  i can tell you ”

a fresh point seemed to occur to him 

“by the way  squire  your surmise about the fate of the air gun in the
first attacks turns out to be correct  my men have been dragging the
river near the bank at the boat house  and we’ve got the air gun that
killed the two shandons  the murderer must have pitched it into the
water just as you suggested ”

wendover was distinctly pleased at this tribute to his acuteness 

“is there anything identifiable about it?” he demanded 

“it seems to have come from the whistlefield armoury ” sir clinton
replied  “confound them  i wish they hadn’t gone in so strong for
air guns  it makes things more difficult ”



chapter xiv 

the forged cheque

sir clinton had yet another surprise in store for his host  just
before dinner  he apparently made up his mind to ring up whistlefield 
and to wendover’s astonishment he suggested that the squire should
accompany him to the telephone 

“you’ll hear only one side of the conversation ” he said  with a
rather grim expression  “but i think it may interest you  and perhaps
it will be just as well to have a witness to testify about my end of
the wire  i wish we had two receivers  for then you would have heard
the whole thing ”

he got the connection in a moment or two and then astounded wendover
by asking for ernest shandon instead of ardsley  after a few minutes 
wendover heard the beginning of the conversation 

“sir clinton driffield speaking  mr  shandon  you must treat this as
absolutely confidential        absolutely for yourself  not a breath
of it to anyone else  you understand?       i want you to keep an eye
on your secretary       yes  stenness  i want him kept under
observation  if you see him leave the house  ring me up
immediately       yes  at once       it won’t be for long  i’m coming
across very shortly       i didn’t catch that       yes  you weren’t
far out in your suspicions  most fortunate you mentioned the matter of
the cheque       anything further? do you mean about the
murderer?       oh  i think i’ll have him to morrow  quite possibly—if
he doesn’t bolt  if he doesn’t bolt  i said  that’s the only thing i’m
afraid of        yes  i’m sure that would interest you  after all 
one’s skin is one’s dearest possession  good night  we shall be across
shortly after dinner ”

wendover had been able to gather the gist of the conversation from the
side which he had heard 

“you’re afraid of stenness doing a bolt? and you think he’s the man
you’re after?”

“really  squire  you must take a reef in your questions ” sir clinton
said  reproachfully  “i stretched a point to let you hear that talk 
and i certainly didn’t intend to stand a cross examination about it 
you must make what you can out of it for yourself  and that reminds
me  i’m afraid you can’t be present when i interview master stenness 
you’ll just have to be a private caller this evening and wait for
results till later ”

wendover was not particularly pleased with this last news  he had
evidently counted on hearing what sir clinton had to say to the
secretary  however  he realised that he was in the hands of the chief
constable and must do as he was told  so when they arrived at
whistlefield  he asked for ernest shandon while sir clinton went into
the study to interview stenness 

the secretary arrived in a few moments  he was still looking very
anxious  perhaps even more anxious than in the morning  sir clinton
wasted no time but came to grips with the subject at once 

“now  mr  stenness  i’ve one or two questions to put to you  i may as
well caution you that anything you say may be used against you if you
are put on your trial ”

stenness’s face betrayed less surprise than might have been expected 

“you say ‘if ’ but perhaps you mean ‘when’?”

“i’m picking my words with some care ” sir clinton assured him  “i
mean ‘if ’ the point’s still in doubt  but i want to play the game
with you and take no improper advantage ”

the imperturbable face of the secretary showed neither relief nor
depression 

“it’s very good of you ” he said in a colourless voice  sir clinton
considered for a moment  stenness moved over to a chair and sat down 

“i think i can put my cards on the table in your case  stenness ” the
chief constable said at length  “nothing i’m going to tell you will be
news to you  and there seems no reason why i shouldn’t say it ”

stenness looked up indifferently  his mind seemed to be occupied with
something quite apart from the affair in hand 

“go on ” he said  apathetically 

“here are the facts  then ” sir clinton began  “you were employed here
as roger shandon’s secretary  in that capacity  you seem to have had
access to his cheque books  it’s not a usual thing  but i have sound
reasons for supposing that it was so in your case ”

stenness nodded his assent 

“i don’t deny that ” he admitted 

“you have the key of the safe  haven’t you? would you mind seeing if
you can find the cheque book that roger shandon used last?”

stenness walked over to the safe  opened it  and after a few moments’
search he unearthed the cheque book 

“now ” sir clinton went on  “would you mind turning up the counterfoil
numbered 60073?”

stenness looked up without showing any emotion on his features 

“there’s no such counterfoil in the book ” he admitted 

“but you find 60072 and 60074 there?”

“yes ”

“rather a peculiar state of affairs  isn’t it?”

“it is ”

sir clinton turned to another subject 

“there’s a bundle of returned cheques in that drawer of the
writing desk  isn’t there?”

“there is  do you want it?”

sir clinton seemed to disregard the question 

“would it surprise you  stenness  if you learned that one of these
cheques has been abstracted and that it can’t be found? the bank
returned it in due course for all that ”

stenness gazed stonily at his interlocutor 

“it wouldn’t surprise me in the slightest ”

sir clinton paused for a moment before continuing  when he spoke again
it was in a different vein 

“these are all plain facts  now we come to hypothesis  and of course
the ground’s not quite so firm  i think  if you don’t mind  we might
put it in the form of one of these john doe and richard roe cases 
lest you should think      ”

he left the sentence incomplete 

“now ” he began briskly  “let’s suppose that john doe is a rich man
who has made his money in rather peculiar ways—like the late roger
shandon  for example  he employs a secretary  i think one may
reasonably suppose that a secretary in that case would need to be
somebody who could shut his eyes when necessary  and who wouldn’t be
apt to judge things too rigidly  in fact  stenness  he would need to
be a fairly unscrupulous fellow himself ”

stenness nodded indifferently 

“go on ”

“i’m putting a hypothetical case  remember ” sir clinton cautioned
him  “this is what might be said—i don’t necessarily accept it myself 
i’m only trying to show you how it could be made to look  you
understand? well  then  this secretary  richard roe  sooner or later
sees the chance which providence has thrown in his way  his employer
is in the habit of drawing bearer cheques for large amounts—some
thousands—from time to time  and  rather carelessly  he has dropped
into the way of getting his secretary to cash them for him and bring
him the money  so the bank is accustomed to paying over these things
to the secretary  and no questions asked ”

stenness gave no sign of special interest  his normal reserve was
sufficient to veil his thoughts 

“the secretary  we may assume  is an acute fellow  i think we may take
it that he may see a chance when it comes his way  but forgery
requires a certain amount of manual skill if it is carried out in some
ways  and possibly the secretary is sufficiently acute to distrust his
powers as a forger  but it’s always possible to trace a signature ”

sir clinton pulled out his cigarette case and lit a cigarette before
going on  he seemed determined to infuse informality into the
proceedings 

“it’s always possible to trace a signature ” he continued  “but one
needs a model signature for that—a signature from a cheque  of course 
because sensible people don’t use their letter signature on their
cheques  they have a special one with some specific trick in it—the
position of a dot  or something of the sort  i hope i’m not boring you
with these elementary things ”

“not at all ” said stenness  with a certain show of polite interest 

“the model  in the case of the secretary richard roe ” went on sir
clinton  “could easily be chosen from one of the old cheques returned
by the bank  he had access to these  we may suppose  but then comes in
a point which is sure to strike his acute mind  a man never writes his
signature twice in precisely the same way  there’s always a faint
difference between any two signatures  hence  if two cheques turn up
with identical signatures  a sharp detective might suspect something
wrong  you follow me?”

stenness nodded in silence 

“the acute secretary  richard roe  therefore traces his employer’s
signature from one of these old cheques  and to cover his trail  to
make certain that the thing cannot be shown to be a traced signature 
he then destroys the old cheque  thus there are not two identical
signatures in existence  and the only thing missing is a cancelled
cheque—not a thing anyone is likely to make a fuss about at the worst 
even if its disappearance is noted  i make myself clear?”

“quite ” said stenness  still with his air of formal interest 

“so far  then ” sir clinton went on  “all is plain sailing  but now
comes a sticky bit  in fact   the  sticky bit of the whole affair 
every cheque has its counterfoil  and mr  john doe  the employer  has
had an awkward habit of always filling in his counterfoils  hence when
mr  richard roe traces his employer’s signature on  let us say  cheque
no  60073  he has to do something about the counterfoil of that
cheque  if he leaves it blank  it will catch the attention of the good
mr  doe the next time he uses the cheque book  if the acute secretary
fudges an entry on counterfoil no  60073  then mr  doe  who is by no
means a dull fellow  may spot the thing and cause trouble  what is to
be done? the obvious thing is to remove counterfoil no  60073 from the
cheque book and trust that its absence will not be noticed  i think
that is the course i’d have followed myself if i had got into that
fix ”

sir clinton seemed for a moment to lose interest in his narrative  he
sat for a time in silence  eyeing the secretary as though he hoped to
surprise something  but stenness showed no sign of either guilt or
confusion 

“i congratulate you on your nerves  stenness ” sir clinton began once
more  “now that’s an hypothesis which i should not be very loath to
adopt as an explanation of this affair of the cheques  it seems to me
to cover the ground neatly  in fact  i’m quite convinced that it’s a
good hypothesis so far as it goes  but some people might be prepared
to carry it a stage further  i’ll just sketch out what they would
say ”

at this point stenness seemed to find some interest in the matter  he
sat up and looked across at the chief constable 

“please go on ” he requested 

“we have assumed that richard roe is an acute person  now an alert
mind might quite conceivably see a further step which would bring him
on to safer ground  if things took their course  the forgery would be
spotted in a very short time  one can’t take thousands out of a man’s
account without raising inquiry  so  normally  the reasonable thing to
do would be to bolt and chance getting out of the country with the
cash  that’s what would occur to most people at once  but there’s
another way of making sure of things ”

sir clinton’s voice took on a graver tone 

“let us suppose that immediately the cheque has been cashed  the
employer happens to die  what evidence of forgery is left then? none
whatever  if the tracing of the signature has been decently executed 
the supposed writer is dead  and no one else can deny his signature 
and the cheque  we assume  has been cashed before the death takes
place  on that basis  there would be no need for any flight on the
part of the forger  he would simply have to sit tight and behave
normally ”

sir clinton surprised a fresh look on stenness’s face  it was only a
fleeting change  but it was quite unmistakable  but the secretary
remained obstinately mute and waited for the rest of the argument 

“that’s assuming a natural death of the employer  but such
coincidences are rather rare  an acute mind would not count on a
chance like that  however  rare as such coincidences may be  they are
not beyond possibility  if a human agent should happen to take a hand
in the business  suppose that the acute richard roe perceived this 
and decided that it was worth his while to produce that coincidence by
murdering his employer       ”

sir clinton swung round in his chair  surprised by the opening of the
door  ardsley stood on the threshold  and a glance at his face showed
that something serious had happened 

“it’s all up  sir clinton  they can pull down the blinds ”

“miss hawkhurst?” was all sir clinton could say 

ardsley made a gesture of despair 

“some things are beyond us ” he said despondently 



chapter xv 

the secretary’s affairs

sir clinton received ardsley’s news almost as if he had feared that
the end was inevitable  he made no attempt to express his feelings 
however 

“i think you’d better let the others know ” he suggested 

ardsley agreed  with a faint grimace of reluctance for the task  and
left the room 

stenness had listened to the interchange between the two with an air
of a man trying to persuade himself that he is in a dream and that by
a violent effort he may be able to shake off his nightmare  at last he
seemed to master his feelings 

“it’s all over  is it?” he asked in a choked voice  as though hoping
even at the last moment to be reassured by good news 

“it’s all over ” sir clinton admitted  gravely 

stenness seemed to pull himself together 

“then in that case ” he said  “there seems to be no reason why i
shouldn’t make a clean breast of things  nothing matters much  now 
and you may as well get the true story  it’ll make no difference to
me ”

sir clinton made a vague gesture of assent  but refrained from
speaking  after a moment or two  stenness began 

“this is how it happened  not so long ago  i was a cub with no near
relations to look after me and keep me straight  i’m not whining  i’m
simply explaining  i had a few thousands of capital  and naturally a
good deal of it got frittered away  i learned something about the
world in the process  so perhaps it wasn’t a total loss ”

sir clinton noticed that even at this stage stenness retained his
conciseness and stuck to the main facts  the secretary was sparing him
useless details  and  as he had said  he was not whining over his
losses 

“when i had been at it for a year or two  i had run myself down to a
little over five thousand pounds  that’s a good enough nest egg  but i
hadn’t the sense to see it in that light  i wanted a good deal more
than three or four hundred a year  so i looked about for some way of
increasing my capital ”

a faintly contemptuous expression crossed his face 

“i must have been a very green hand in those days  i had a sort of
trustfulness which i’ve lost since then  to make a long story short i
was swindled out of that five thousand  i was so green that at the
time i didn’t realise who was at the back of the swindle  all i met
were agents of the big fish in the background  they cleaned me out 
almost completely ”

he shifted slightly in his chair as though the recollection made him
uncomfortable 

“i had to do something for a living  and somehow i dropped into
secretarial work—the kind where it’s more important that a man should
have a decent appearance than that he should know his work  but by
that time i realised that i’d have to work for a living  and i sobered
up  i took things seriously and picked up all i could  i turned into
quite a decently efficient secretary ”

sir clinton nodded  it was no more than stenness’s due 

“i drifted about from post to post  until a couple of years ago i
dropped into roger shandon’s place  i learned a lot with him  it was a
perfect education—on certain lines ”

“i can quite imagine that ” sir clinton interjected 

“he was a damned scoundrel ” stenness pronounced  without heat  “but i
picked up a lot about the seamy side of affairs from things that
passed through my hands  it was interesting  even at first  and then 
it got more interesting ”

he shifted again in his chair so as to look sir clinton in the face 

“i came across a name in his correspondence  the name of one of the
fellows who had helped to rook me of that last five thousand  that put
me on the alert  i began to hunt things up  it took me a good while 
and none of it was in any way explicit  you understand  but i had
sense enough to put two and two together and fill up the blanks  my
late employer was the man who had been behind the ramp that cleared me
of the last of my cash ”

“you couldn’t have expected me to guess that ” sir clinton said  as
though defending himself  “i knew there was more behind this business
than appeared on the surface  but naturally i’d no inkling of anything
of that sort ”

stenness paid no attention to the interruption 

“i suppose my training under roger shandon had taken the refined edge
off any honesty i had  or else it had left the honesty but blunted my
respect for the conventions  if you like it better that way  it seemed
to me  anyhow  a simple enough state of affairs  this fellow shandon
had picked my pocket—at least that was what it amounted to in
practice  though i doubt if i could have charged him with fraud and
brought it home to him  well  i saw no particular reason why he should
get away with my money  he’d taken advantage of my stupidity or
trustfulness  or whatever you like to call it  i decided to pay him
back in his own coin  i might have milked him of a fair extra sum as a
fine  but that didn’t suit my book  i’ve got a peculiar brand of
conscience  and i made up my mind that i’d take precisely the cash
that he cheated me out of  no doubt the odd figures on the cheque
surprised you ”

“no ” sir clinton objected  “i simply took it that shandon wasn’t in
the habit of drawing cheques for round thousands and that you filled
in an odd figure so as not to make the cheque look uncommon ”

“i’d have done that in any case  of course ” stenness explained  “but
as it happened  the exact sum he took from me originally made a likely
enough figure  and i stuck to it  i didn’t even fine him a sovereign
for his swindling  i contented myself with taking back exactly what
i’d lost  i saw nothing wrong in it  and i see nothing wrong in it
now  my conscience doesn’t trouble me a rap in the matter  legally  of
course  it’s quite a different question ”

“quite ” said sir clinton  but his tone gave no clue to his views on
the matter 

“as to the actual business  i needn’t go over it  for you put your
finger on it quite correctly up to a point  not ten minutes ago  i
forged his signature  destroyed the cancelled cheque  cut the
counterfoil out of the cheque book  and cashed the forged cheque 
nobody suspected anything ”

“there was no reason why they should—at the time ”

“no  but now i come to the point where you made a further suggestion 
you brought out the idea that i’d murdered shandon to cover the
trail ”

“i suggested it as an hypothesis that some people might be inclined to
put forward ” corrected sir clinton  “if you remember  i refrained
from supporting it myself ”

stenness reflected for a moment 

“that’s true  but murder never entered into my plans at all  bear in
mind that i don’t feel a criminal in this affair  all i’ve done is to
take my own money out of the hand of a fellow who had picked my
pocket  you’d recover your own purse if you caught a thief red handed
with it  and you wouldn’t call yourself a robber for doing so  well 
no more do i ”

“go on ” said sir clinton  in unconscious plagiarism 

“that being so ” stenness continued  “murder was the last thing that
would have entered my mind  why should i murder him? i’d squared the
account  i’d got my money back again  what would be the point in
putting my neck into a noose? none whatever! all i needed was a clean
get away  i planned that carefully enough ”

“that’s no particular business of mine at present ” sir clinton
reminded him  “but one might ask what you’re doing here  since it’s
evidently not according to plan ”

“it’s easy to account for that  i had planned to get away on the
evening of the day when the shandons were murdered  i was in the
middle of clearing up preparations for a bolt       and suddenly came
the affair in the maze  could i bolt then? not likely  i’d have been
marked down as the murderer if i’d stirred a step  and look what face
would have been on things if i’d cleared out  it would have added the
last touch of substance to the very hypothesis you put forward  the
whole forgery business would have been raked up to furnish a motive  i
couldn’t have faced it—for i hadn’t an alibi  nobody could swear that
i was in my room—i was packing up—at the time the murders were done 
it would have been a clear enough case for any jury ”

sir clinton’s face showed that he agreed with this reading 

“there’s one point that hasn’t come out  though ” he said  “what’s the
meaning of this sudden collapse on your part? if your conscience is
clear—and i don’t doubt your account of it—why do you throw up the
sponge like this? that’s not very clear ”

stenness’s face showed that sir clinton had touched him on the raw  he
had some difficulty with his voice as he replied 

“i may as well put all the cards on the table  you know what miss
hawkhurst was like? any man might have fallen in love with her  i did 
at any rate ”

“were you engaged?”

“no  i’ve got some sort of pride  even if i am a forger  miss
hawkhurst had an income of her own  what had i? nothing  anyone might
have supposed i was after her money ”

“hardly the money alone  surely—miss hawkhurst herself would account
for the attraction without that ”

“well  i’m not that sort ” said stenness  abruptly  “i’m not the kind
of man who can live on his wife’s money  i can’t explain it  it is
so ”

“your conscience is a rum contrivance ” sir clinton commented  not
unkindly 

“it’s in good working order  at any rate ” stenness retorted  “now 
isn’t the thing clear enough to you? i meant to recover my money 
clear out  work hard and make enough for my purposes  i reckoned that
a couple of years would do it  if i took risks  and before i went  i
was going to take the biggest risk of all  i was going to tell sylvia
the whole story and see what she had to say ”

sir clinton could not repress his surprise 

“you’re a rum card  stenness  be thankful i’ve had a large experience
of liars and know when a man’s speaking the truth  for that yarn
wouldn’t be believed by one person in a hundred ”

“it’s the truth for all that ” returned stenness  doggedly  “i’ve told
you before that i see nothing wrong in what i’ve done—nothing morally
wrong  i mean  he swindled me  i take my money back again  what’s
wrong in that?”

“i wish i had your simple way of looking at things ”

sir clinton sat in silence for a few moments  evidently pondering over
the case 

“you’re a problem  stenness ” he said at last  “i don’t really know
what to do with you ”

“oh  arrest me!” stenness exclaimed  bitterly  “nothing matters now 
she’s dead  it’s all over  and i don’t much care what happens ”

“pull yourself together  man ” said sir clinton  curtly  “that sort of
chatter does all right on the stage  nobody with a backbone takes a
knock like that  if you wake up three years hence in a prison cell 
you’ll look at things in a different light  and be very fed up that
you’ve lost your liberty as well as other things  some things are
inevitable  others aren’t  don’t behave like a child ”

stenness took the rebuke sullenly 

“well  what does it matter?” he demanded  “you have enough in your
hands to convict me if you want to—and i don’t care  do as you like 
i’ll write it out for you now  if you think it’ll save you trouble 
i’m not inclined to wriggle at the last moment ”

sir clinton gave no sign that he had heard him  instead  he seemed
engrossed on some problem  at last he lifted his head 

“i can’t follow that intricate conscience of yours  stenness  it’s
beyond me  but i can sympathise to some extent with your analogy of
the pickpocket caught red handed  that was very apt  i’m going to give
you a chance  i know well enough that you’re speaking the truth about
this business  besides  i can get it checked if necessary  on the
basis of ethics  i think you’ve some right to the money  you have it
here in notes  i suppose?”

“it’s upstairs ”

“very well  bring it down  put it in the safe  seal it up in an
envelope with your name on it before putting it away  i’ll see what’s
to be done about it to morrow  now  do that at once  don’t argue ”

“the money means nothing much to me now ” said stenness angrily 

“then hand it back to the people it legally belongs to ” sir clinton
said coolly  “if you don’t want it  other people may have a use for
it  it’s a fair test of all that high falutin’ stuff you laid off a
minute or two ago ”

stenness made no reply  but rose and went towards the door 

“oh  just another thing  stenness  meet me at the front of the house
here at       at        have you a time table?”

stenness produced the abc from a shelf and sir clinton turned over its
pages before continuing 

“the first train’s at 7 10 a m  ” he said  “meet me out at the
house door at half past six sharp to morrow morning  now don’t fail!”

stenness was plainly bewildered  and in his astonishment he gave a
grudging assent 

“that’ll do  then ” sir clinton went on  “just put that cash in the
safe  now  and  by the bye  send ardsley to me as you go out ”

stenness nodded dully and moved towards the door  now that he had made
a clean breast of things  his mind seemed to have gone back to his
loss  and his whole bearing was eloquent of his utter despair  sir
clinton watched him leave the room 

“a tough bullet for the poor devil to bite on ” he thought to himself 
“well  ‘joy cometh in the morning ’ it says somewhere or other 
perhaps he’ll find it so ”

he lit a fresh cigarette and seemed to dismiss stenness from his mind 

“i wonder if that devil is wound up far enough to make a final
effort?” he reflected in some perplexity  “i believe he is  at any
rate  i’ll take the chance of it  he’s had it all his own way so far 
and this ought to encourage him ”

ardsley came into the room and smiled on seeing that sir clinton was
alone 

“i’m in a hurry  ardsley  stenness has taken up a lot of valuable time
with his woes  what i wanted is this  will you be at the house door
here at half past six o’clock to morrow morning without fail? i’ll
need you  perhaps ”

he paused  then as an after thought apparently  he added 

“i don’t suppose you could give a death certificate in the case of a
death by misadventure  could you?”

ardsley shook his head 

“i’d need to know something about the case before i could venture on
that sort of thing  the coroner would want to have a say in business
of that kind ”

sir clinton reluctantly agreed 

“now suppose we pick up wendover in the other room  no one will want
to see miss hawkhurst to night?”

“i’ll see to that ” ardsley assured him  “another doctor will need to
be called in  and so forth  until he turns up  i think no one need go
into that room ”



chapter xvi 

the last attack in the maze

when ardsley and the chief constable entered the other room they found
wendover with ernest shandon and arthur  in the stress of his emotion 
ernest seemed to have flown to his usual comforter  for he had a
decanter and a syphon at his elbow  arthur hawkhurst seemed to be
endeavouring to restrain his feelings to the best of his ability  but
it was obvious at a glance that his nerves were all on edge 

“miss forrest isn’t here?” sir clinton inquired  though the question
was needless 

“no ” ernest hastened to explain  “she’s not here  i think she must be
somewhere else—upstairs in her own room  perhaps  or else somewhere
about the house  or she may have gone out with torrance  he’s gone for
a walk  quite possibly she went out with him  very thoughtful of them
to leave us to our grief  very thoughtful  i don’t know how we’ll get
over this  i really don’t know  sylvia was so useful about the
place—made things run so smoothly  you know  we’ll miss her terribly ”

he drank some of his whisky and soda 

“where’s stenness?” demanded arthur  as though to show that he had
himself under control 

“he’s busy ” sir clinton explained 

“he’s lucky to have something to be busy with ” arthur commented  “i
wish i’d something to do to take my mind off this business just now ”

ernest drank some more whisky and soda thoughtfully  then put his hand
into his pocket and seemed to feel for something 

“i’ve lost my cigar case ” he announced disconsolately  “really 
everything seems to be going wrong together  these last few days ”

wendover opened his mouth to speak  but closed it again as he caught
sir clinton’s frown and remembered the chief constable’s caution to
him about the case 

“lost your case?” sir clinton inquired  “that’s a nuisance ”

ernest was still feeling vaguely in his pocket as though he expected
to unearth the cigar case in some remote corner 

“it’s been missing for a day or two ” he complained  “i can’t think
what’s become of it  i’ve hunted through all my other suits  and it
isn’t there  and i’ve searched all over the house  too  and yet i
can’t find it  i suppose i’ll have to buy another  and that’s such a
nuisance  you know  one gets accustomed to the thing one uses  a new
one won’t feel the same for long enough ”

“you can’t remember where you put it down last  i suppose?” sir
clinton asked  “it’s always a good plan to go back to the time you can
remember using it last  if i’m not mistaken  you had it with you in
the maze when you were attacked  you told me you took out a cigar
then  does that suggest anything? you may be able to pick up the
thread now and remember using it again after that ”

ernest shandon’s face lighted up with a certain dull satisfaction 

“no  now i remember quite well  you’ve reminded me of it  isn’t it
funny how one can forget a thing and then  if one gets a jog to one’s
memory  the whole thing comes back again? i often find that  quite
often ”

“so you know where it is now? well  that’s always a relief ”

ernest’s face fell again 

“yes  i remember where i dropped it  but i can’t get it to night 
that’s the worst of it  i dropped it in the maze when i was shot at  i
was sitting there in helen’s bower  and when i jumped up the thing
fell off my knee  it must be lying there yet  i’d forgotten all about
it  those cigars won’t be much good now ” he ended  regretfully 

“why not go and get it?” wendover asked  with a tinge of malice  he
had not forgiven ernest for his pusillanimous display on the night
that sylvia was shot 

ernest looked round at him  wide eyed in astonishment  he took off his
glasses  polished them carefully  replaced them on his nose  and
continued his staring examination of wendover 

“well  really ” he managed to say at last  “that’s a very strange
suggestion  wendover  very strange  do you imagine that i’d go out in
the dark  down to the maze  and hunt about for my case? why  it would
be foolhardy  positively tempting providence  to do that  this
murderer fellow may be lurking outside the house door  for all we can
tell  and you calmly propose that i should walk straight out and put
myself in his way! well  really      ”

he turned to the decanter at his side and poured out a fresh stiff
glass 

arthur hawkhurst had listened to his uncle’s exhibition of caution
with unconcealed contempt  and he now broke in with all the brutality
of youth 

“cold feet  eh?”

ernest seemed to resent the imputation with a certain dull animosity 

“it seems to me only commonsense  arthur  why should i run any risks?
i’ve been attacked once  and since they didn’t succeed in damaging me
then  they’ll obviously be waiting for another chance  i think it
would be a stupid move to put myself in the way  a very stupid move
indeed  and i think most sensible people would agree with me  if you
don’t  and if you want something to do  you might go down to the maze
and get me my cigar case yourself  that would be better than sitting
there  sneering at your elders ”

he assumed the air of one who had just administered a well merited
rebuke  but his dignity was slightly diminished by the necessity of
putting his glasses straight  arthur seemed to take his uncle’s
protest as a taunt 

“think i’m in a funk  too? i’ll go and get your case if you like ”

ernest appeared to be horrified at the suggestion 

“i couldn’t think of it!” he exclaimed  almost with animation  “why 
anything might happen out in the dark there  you’re not to go  arthur 
i forbid it ”

arthur’s lips shut tight for a moment as he looked at his uncle 

“it doesn’t matter a damn to me whether you forbid it or not  i’ve
offered to go  and i’m not going to draw back now and let people think
i was only bragging  besides  how do you know anyone’s after me?
they’re after you all right  they’ve attacked you already  but that’s
no reason why they should worry about me  is it? i guess you’re the
one they’ve marked down  uncle ”

“oh  indeed  do you think so?” said ernest  uncomfortably  “i don’t
think that’s a very nice thing to say  arthur  it’s one of these
things that may have too much truth in them to be altogether a joke 
you know  i wish you wouldn’t say them  i don’t like them  i really
don’t  and i don’t want you to go out of the house to night  suppose
anything were to happen to you!”

he paused for a moment  then added as a final argument 

“we’ve got trouble enough on our hands just now ”

sir clinton was watching arthur keenly  and the boy turned round in
time to catch the expression on the chief constable’s face 

“you think i was just bragging? all right  you’ll see  i’ll take one
of the cars down to the maze and i’ll be back in ten minutes ”

he turned on his heel and walked out of the room  to wendover’s
surprise  sir clinton made no attempt to detain him  ernest’s face
showed marked annoyance  evidently he could not help seeing that his
super caution had been brought into the limelight once again 

“i think that’s a silly trick ” he complained  “what’s the good of
running unnecessary risks? i can get along without my cigar case till
to morrow  and here he goes off  posing to himself as a young
hero—while really  you know  he’s only a foolhardy young ass  but he
was always like that  i wish sylvia had been here  she could manage
him  i never seemed to have any influence with him  somehow ”

ardsley  obviously bored  rose and left the room  sir clinton took the
opportunity of changing the subject 

“while your nephew’s away  mr  shandon  i think i’d better take the
opportunity of giving you some information  you remember telling me
something about a cheque and a missing counterfoil?”

“yes ” ernest admitted  apparently not averse to the fresh subject  “i
thought i ought to tell you about that! it may not have been
important  but i thought you ought to have all the information about
everything  even if it didn’t seem to be anything very vital  you
understand? one never knows how one thing may hinge on to another  if
you see what i mean? and it certainly seemed a strange thing to
me—very rum ”

“i’ve looked into the matter ” sir clinton went on  “and i think i’ve
succeeded in doing what’s probably the most important thing from your
point of view  i’ve recovered a few thousand pounds  which somebody
might have got away with  you’ll find it in your safe to night  it
will be in notes  you’d better take the numbers of them  i haven’t had
time to do that  and it might be as well to know them ”

ernest’s eyes lighted up when he heard the result of sir clinton’s
work  but the brief illumination died and was followed by a depressed
expression 

“does this mean there’ll be a prosecution  and i’ll have to give
evidence? that’ll be a troublesome business ”

sir clinton reassured him with a gesture 

“well  perhaps we’d better not start crossing bridges till we come to
them  let’s leave the matter for the present  it’s not for me to
advise you whether to force on a case or not  i’ll even refrain from
mentioning the name of the man who took the money ”

“oh  i’ve a pretty good notion of that ” ernest protested  with a
certain air of low cunning which sat ill on his dull features  “i may
not be very clever  you know  but i can put two and two together all
right ”

“then we’ll leave it at that ” said sir clinton  and his tone closed
the discussion on that point 

for a time they sat in silence  wendover could not quite understand
sir clinton’s manœuvres  quite obviously he had given arthur the last
spur which had driven him into this expedition to the maze  and
wendover was inclined to agree with ernest that it was a foolhardy
business  he waited with some anxiety for the boy’s return 

all at once they heard the sound of hasty footsteps in the hall  and
the door was flung open  and arthur hurried into the room  wendover
noticed that  though excited  he was in no panic 

“you were right enough  uncle!” he exclaimed  still standing with the
handle of the door in his hand  “the beggar had a shot at me just at
the entrance to the maze ”

ernest nodded his head with an attempt at sapience 

“i told you so ” he said  “i told you so! but of course you wouldn’t
believe me  no  you knew more about it than i did  but you see
now      ”

“come along  the lot of you ” arthur cried  “we’ll nab the beggar this
time  he can’t be far away yet ”

“sit down!” sir clinton ordered calmly  “he’s had any amount of time
to get clear away  we’d never catch him in the dark  i must hear how
it happened  first of all  now give me every detail you can think of ”

arthur seemed sobered by the matter of fact air of the chief
constable  he sat down and began his story without more ado 

“i took out the two seater from the garage ” he explained  “and
bucketted down to the maze as quick as i could  it’s a dark night
outside  not even a star showing  i left the headlights on when i
stopped the car  and i left the engine running as well  it wasn’t
going to take me any time to get to helen’s bower  i got out  and
crossed over to the entrance to the maze that’s nearest the road  it
was pretty dark  but i could find my way all right ”

“you heard nobody about?” asked wendover 

“nothing but the beat of the engine  just as i got to the entrance and
was going inside  i heard an air gun go off quite close to me—no
distance at all  i should say—and i felt something hit me about the
breast pocket ”

sir clinton leaned forward 

“don’t touch!” he said  pointing to the side of arthur’s
dinner jacket  “you hadn’t a coat on  i see?”

arthur looked down  the feathering of one of the lethal darts was
protruding from his jacket 

“oh  it stuck  did it?” he said  “i thought it had failed to get
through the cloth  it’s driven into my leather cigar case  i expect ”

sir clinton made a rapid examination and then cautiously withdrew the
dart  inspection of the cigar case showed that the point of the
missile had embedded itself in one of the cigars 

“that saved you a nasty prick ” was all the comment the chief
constable made  “let’s hear the rest ”

“i was just going to start after the beggar ” arthur went on  “when
suddenly there was a yell from the road  when i looked round  there
was old mrs  thornton having a fit of hysterics or something over on
the road  right in the beam of the headlights ”

“who is mrs  thornton?” inquired sir clinton 

“she’s the wife of the lodge keeper at the east gate ”

“there’s nothing wrong with the thorntons ” wendover hastened to
interject  “i’ve known them for twenty years and a decenter old couple
you couldn’t find anywhere ”

sir clinton made a gesture as though brushing aside the interruption 

“and then?” he demanded 

“well  there she was  screaming her head off ” arthur continued 
“she’d heard the sound of the air gun  and of course air guns aren’t
liked hereabouts nowadays  so she’d just started to yell at once  she
thought it was meant for her  it seems  i hustled her into the car and
drove her home  full tilt  then when i’d got rid of her  i put up the
hood and side curtains and came back here again  hell for leather  i
guessed that the side curtains would stop anything  if the beggar had
another try  and i had the throttle about full open as i passed the
maze  so he hadn’t much of a mark  anyway ”

wendover’s opinion of arthur went up considerably during this
narrative  the youngster seemed to have had sense enough to take
precautions  once he was convinced of the reality of the danger  and
there was no doubt about the attack  wendover had seen the depth to
which the dart had penetrated the cigar case and its contents  it must
have been fired at very close range indeed 

“h’m!” said sir clinton  “now i think we’ll take your advice and get
down to the maze ”

much to the surprise of them all  ernest got to his feet with the
rest  he evidently saw their expressions  for he seemed rather
shamefaced 

“i think i’ll come along with you ” he said  diffidently  then  with
an assumption of confidence he added  “i know you’ve all been sneering
at me for taking care of my skin  i’ll just show you that it was
caution and not because i was afraid  i can take the same risks as the
rest of you!”

on reflection  wendover was hardly so much impressed by this offer 
obviously  the murderer  having made his attack  would at once set
about getting away from the neighbourhood of the maze  and by this
time he would probably be far enough away to avoid pursuit  ernest 
therefore  was risking very little by joining the party 

“take out the limousine  arthur ” he suggested  “it’ll hold the lot of
us—and the glass will give us good cover ”

wendover smiled at the return of ernest’s caution  though he admitted
that the choice was sound enough  they hurried to the garage and
arthur drove them down to the maze 

once there  ernest seemed to feel that he had perhaps been
over courageous 

“somebody ought to look after the car ” he suggested  “if we leave it
here the fellow may steal up and go off with it  suppose he is lurking
about  and where should we be then? he’d have got clean away and left
us standing  i think i’d better sit in the car while you hunt about 
and then we’ll know       ”

at the sight of the open contempt on sir clinton’s face  he let his
proposal die away before it was completed  and crawled reluctantly out
of the car with the others  he even made a show of eagerness and led
the way to the maze entrance 

“you’re off the line a bit  uncle ” arthur pointed out 

“i can’t see very well in the dark ” ernest complained  “and this
grass is simply soaked with dew  i’ve got my feet all wet  such a
nuisance       ”

he tripped over something and came heavily to the ground  a heart felt
oath reached their ears 

“i’m wet all down the front  now ” ernest wailed  “i fell over some
damned thing or other and i’ve hurt my toe  i hope it hasn’t split the
nail  what  is  this thing  damn it?”

he seemed to be feeling about in the dark 

“why! it’s the air gun!”

sir clinton’s flash lamp suddenly shot out its glare  and in the cone
of illumination they saw the grotesque figure of ernest kneeling on
the ground with the air gun clutched in his hand  he rose to his feet
laboriously 

“i’m soaking with that dew  very heavy it’s been to night  wasn’t it a
godsend that i had a spot of whisky just before coming out? that’ll
keep a cold away  i’ll have another one—a whisky hot—when i get back
again ”

sir clinton paid no attention to ernest’s babble  he took the air gun
gingerly from its discoverer’s hand and held it out to arthur in the
glare of the flashlamp 

“one of the local armoury  i suppose?”

arthur examined it for a moment 

“yes  that’s one of ours ”

the honours of discovery  however  seemed destined to fall to ernest 

“here ” he demanded  “turn that light over this way  will you? there’s
something round my foot ”

they could hear him kicking in the obscurity  sir clinton swung the
beam round and stooped down 

“it’s a bit of black thread you’ve got tangled up in  wait a jiffy ”

he freed ernest from the fibre and began to trace along the thread
with his light  it seemed to be merely the end of a long tentacle
extending out from the entrance to the maze 

“ariadne’s clue!” exclaimed wendover  when he saw the direction in
which the filament lay 

sir clinton nodded briefly 

“you people had better get back to the car ” he said  “i don’t want
the ground trampled here  we can look at it in the morning  i’m just
going to follow up this thread  i’ll be back in a minute or two ”

holding his light low  he disappeared into the intricacies of the
maze  while wendover shepherded the others back to the car  once round
a corner or two and well out of sight of the rest  sir clinton ceased
to trouble about the thread and made his way direct to one centre of
the maze  he sought about for a time  evidently fruitlessly  and then
made his way to the other centre  here his search was more successful 
among some bushes in the enclosure  he unearthed a suit case 

“well   that  was a long shot ” he admitted to himself  though with
evident satisfaction  “he’s evidently not too sure that he’s taken me
in with his soft sawder  and he’s provided for contingencies  let’s
see ”

he opened the suit case and scrutinised one or two of the garments in
it 

“complete change of clothes and no marking on so much as a
handkerchief  quite right!”

he re closed the suit case and put it back into the hiding place in
which he had found it  then he retraced his steps in the maze until he
came to the black thread which he proceeded to follow to the end 

“now we’ll go back to the house ” he proposed  when he rejoined the
others at the car  “that thread led me to the boat house ”

“so the attack was made from the river?” wendover asked 

“it’s strange that he didn’t pitch his gun into the water  isn’t it?”
sir clinton said  “one might have expected him to get rid of it in the
easiest way ”

“i expect he got a bit of a shock ” arthur suggested  “he must have
known that he hit me squarely and yet nothing happened  that would be
a bit of a surprise to him  wouldn’t it  perhaps he got rattled ”

“lucky for you there wasn’t a second shot ” was sir clinton’s comment 
“you could hardly expect your cigar case to save you twice running ”

when they reached whistlefield again  they found ardsley talking to
torrance  who had returned from his walk  he had been out alone  it
appeared  vera had gone to her own room when ardsley had given his
news about sylvia and had not reappeared again 

sir clinton took ardsley aside for a moment 

“you’ve got a nurse upstairs in that room?”

ardsley assented 

“one of them’s going to watch all night  there’s a superstition some
people have that one shouldn’t leave a dead person alone  i don’t mind
being superstitious for once  if it’s in a good cause ”

“no one must get into the room  of course ”

“no one shall ” said ardsley  definitely 

sir clinton seemed to be satisfied  and ardsley left the room  the
chief constable had one more private conversation still to carry
through  he took ernest shandon into the study and closed the door 

“i can put my hand on the murderer now  mr  shandon  so you needn’t be
nervous about that  but i’m rather troubled about one point  this is
going to lead to the devil of a scandal if i arrest him  are you
anxious for that?”

ernest seemed staggered by this way of looking at things 

“well  really  i don’t quite see what you mean  it’s a bit obscure 
isn’t it? i must confess i don’t quite follow you  if you understand
me?”

“i’ll put it this way  i could arrest the fellow to night  i know
where he is  i’d have no trouble over that  but i think i can make
surer of him if i wait till to morrow morning  i’ve got to risk his
bolting  i’ve that possibility in view  he might get away  but if he
got away  would you worry much? think of the scandal it would save—and
it’s going to be a big one  and the trial will be a most laborious
affair  too  what do you think? shall i arrest him now  or wait till
the morning and risk his getting away?”

ernest pondered over the problem  but he seemed incapable of giving
any help 

“i really don’t know ” he said  “you’re too deep for me  really  i
can’t make out what you’re driving at ”

sir clinton’s face showed disappointment 

“there are some things that a police official can’t put into plain
words  you know  i can’t say outright that i’d be glad to see the
beggar off the premises  can’t you see what i mean?”

but ernest shook his head dully  and sir clinton gave up the effort 

“oh  very well ” he said  “the responsibility’s mine in any case  i’ll
wait till to morrow and chance it  but i can’t say i’ve got much help
from you  mr  shandon  when the scandal comes  you needn’t blame me ”

he seemed to consider something for a moment  then he added 

“by the way  i suppose you won’t mind putting me up for the night? i’m
taking all the responsibility i’ve any use for  as it is  and i think
i ought to be able to say i was here to night ”

ernest seemed to be rendered completely owlish by this last request 
but he assented willingly enough 

“and wendover  too  of course ” added sir clinton 

he paused for a moment as though in doubt  before speaking again 

“i think i’d better ring up the police station  if you don’t mind  mr 
shandon  i’ll do it now ”

ernest  with a shameless curiosity  followed him to the instrument and
waited until he got the connection 

“sir clinton driffield speaking  sergeant  will you be good enough to
buy me another tin of navy cut—same as the last you got—first thing
to morrow morning? i’ve run out of tobacco  send a man up with it 
will you? yes  navy cut  thanks ”

sir clinton turned away from the instrument and noticed his host
hovering close beside him 

“it’s a handy thing to be a chief constable  isn’t it? i’d run out of
tobacco and i won’t have time to go down to the village to morrow
morning  i shall arrest that fellow first thing after breakfast  and
the formalities may take some time  you know ”



chapter xvii 

the siege of the maze

wendover was awakened next morning in an unfamiliar bedroom to find
sir clinton at his side  the chief constable’s eyes were tired  as
though he had had very little sleep  but otherwise he seemed as alert
as usual 

“come on  squire!” he said  “dress as quick as you can  you needn’t
mind shaving for once  you’ve been clamouring for the arrest of the
murderer for long enough now  so i thought you’d like to be in at the
death  i’ve got an appointment with him this morning  so you’d better
hurry up if you want to see the last scenes in the whistlefield
dramatic entertainment ”

wendover had been rubbing his eyes rather sleepily when he awoke  but
sir clinton’s words stimulated him into activity 

“go on with your dressing and don’t talk ” sir clinton replied to his
questions  “i haven’t time to explain things just now  there’ll be a
good deal of explaining to be done in the end ” he added  gloomily 
“so we may as well make one bite at it!”

wendover hurried over his toilet  and soon he and sir clinton
descended the stair and made their way to the front door  the figure
of stenness was plainly visible in the light of the early morning 

“so it was stenness? somehow i thought it might have been he ”
wendover whispered  while they were still at a distance 

“i’ve got appointments with several people this morning ” sir clinton
said  sharply  “ardsley’s another of them  you needn’t start
suspecting everyone  squire  or you’ll have a busy time  no! no
questions till later!”

he stepped forward and greeted the secretary 

“where’s the gun room  stenness? it may be as well to pick up
something useful!”

the secretary led them down some passages  if he was surprised by sir
clinton’s methods  he showed no visible sign  when they reached the
gun room  each selected a shot gun and ammunition under sir clinton’s
orders  wendover noticed that the chief constable picked out a couple
himself 

“one’s for ardsley ” he explained in answer to wendover’s glance of
surprise  “come along! he’ll be waiting for us outside  i expect ”

when they reached the front door again  ardsley was just stepping out
of his car  sir clinton motioned him back into the driving seat and
directed the others to get into the motor 

“the maze  if you please  ardsley ” he said  when they had seated
themselves 

wendover was completely at sea for a few moments  it was plain that
both ardsley and stenness must be regarded as cleared in the eyes of
the chief constable  or he would not have brought them there and taken
the trouble to arm them  but if they were excluded  the murderer must
belong to a very small group  and suddenly wendover saw his way
through the whole intricacy of the whistlefield case 

“of course! young torrance! he’s the man!”

but he was careful not to utter his views aloud  fearing to draw the
fire of sir clinton  who was sitting beside him with drawn brows 
wendover felt it better to pursue his line of thought silently 

“what an ass i’ve been! young torrance was in the maze when the two
shandons were killed  he was somewhere or other about  probably  when
ernest was attacked  clinton has most likely tracked him down without
saying anything about it  and when sylvia was shot  he wasn’t with us
in the room  they said he was playing billiards by himself  quite
likely he sneaked out of the billiard room window  crept round  did
the shooting  and got back under cover while we were all too taken
aback by the business to do anything  if i’d been a shade quicker 
that night  i’d have got him! and last night  when arthur was
attacked  torrance had gone for a walk alone  it’s obvious! and like
an idiot  i didn’t see it  all one needed was a pencil and paper and a
list of the people who were actually on hand on each occasion  and
then  by elimination  one was bound to get at him straight away ”

he pondered over his own obtuseness for a time  while the car ran down
the road towards the maze  but his train of thought was interrupted by
ardsley pulling up at a word from sir clinton  a uniformed constable
stepped forward from the shelter of a clump of bushes  and wendover
saw with surprise that he had a revolver in his belt 

“everything all right?” demanded sir clinton  as the constable
saluted 

“yes  sir  it went exactly as you told us  about a quarter of an hour
ago we saw him hurrying along the road ”

“just so ” sir clinton interrupted  “i watched him leaving the house ”

“he went into the maze  sir  and as soon as he was well inside  we
followed your orders and put the padlocks on all the gates  he’s tried
to get out once  sir  but as soon as he saw us he ran back into the
maze ”

“you didn’t try to catch him  of course?”

“no  sir  your orders were strict about that  and we kept to them ”

“quite right  now you’ve got the stuff up  haven’t you?”

“it’s over there  sir ”

“well  bring me the megaphone  we’ll need to talk to him before we can
do anything further ”

while the constable was fetching the instrument  they got out of the
car  wendover  when he found himself on the road  gazed across at the
green barriers of the maze  behind which the murderer was lurking  sir
clinton’s tactics were plain enough in their final phase  though
wendover could not understand how the chief constable had been so sure
of running the miscreant down in the particular way he had chosen  he
turned at the sound of steps  to find the constable had come back with
the megaphone  a battered instrument which had probably seen service
at police sports in the past  sir clinton took it from his subordinate
and then called the attention of the group about the car 

“i want you people to take careful note of what happens  from now
onwards  you may have to give evidence about it  so please pay
attention to everything that happens ”

wendover noticed that sir clinton’s voice had lost its usual tinge of
humour  quite obviously he regarded the situation as grave  and his
tone was that of a man who sees difficulties ahead  but means to
overcome them if possible  as soon as he was certain that all the
group were on the alert  the chief constable raised the megaphone and
spoke towards the maze 

“ernest shandon! i have a warrant here for your arrest  i call on you
to surrender  come to the gate nearest the road within five minutes
and give yourself up ”

“he’s got a pistol  sir ” the constable hastened to add to his
previous report  “and an air gun  too  he had them in his hands as he
went into the maze ”

sir clinton raised the megaphone again 

“before you come to the gate  you must throw your weapons over the
hedge  you can’t get away  shandon  you may as well come out quietly ”

his voice echoed across the lawns  but from the recesses of the maze
came no reply 

“five minutes from now ” sir clinton said finally  and put down the
megaphone  he glanced at his wristwatch as he did so 

“he won’t come out  of course  but i’m anxious to do everything in a
justifiable way ” he explained  “he’s had fair warning ”

they stood uneasily about  furtively consulting their watches until
the five minute period had elapsed  but no sign came from the maze 
wendover was completely puzzled by the turn of events  how could
ernest shandon be the murderer? when the attempt had been made on
arthur  ernest shandon had been sitting within ten feet of wendover
himself  under the eye of sir clinton  and the attack had been carried
out here  at the entrance to the maze  then  floating through his
mind  came a recollection of sir clinton’s hint that a man might be
“on both halves of the map simultaneously ” but that was impossible!
no man could be in two places at once  the whole affair seemed to
verge on a nightmare inconsistency  and yet  sir clinton had evidently
foreseen the attempt to escape and had taken precautions to prevent it
being successful  and undoubtedly it must be ernest shandon in the
maze  for the local constables must have recognised him from their
hiding places as he went in 

when the five minutes’ grace had elapsed  sir clinton turned round 
but as he did so  his eye was caught by a new figure which was
advancing over the lawns 

“oh  damnation!” he exclaimed angrily  “here’s the very thing i wanted
to avoid ”

wendover  following sir clinton’s glance  recognised arthur hawkhurst
hurrying towards them  and as he approached  the squire could see that
he was carrying a sporting rifle in his hand 

“you gave me the slip ” arthur said reproachfully  as he came up to
them  “but i spotted what you were after  heard you moving about and
dressed in next to no time  i’m a bit out of breath with the hurry ”

sir clinton looked at him sternly 

“if you come here at all  mr  hawkhurst  you come under my orders  if
you can’t agree to that  i’ll have to see that you’re sent back to the
house ”

arthur frowned heavily  then  after a moment’s thought  he evidently
made up his mind to accept the inevitable 

“very well  then  if you put it like that  there’s no more to be said 
but if the beggar attempts to escape  i suppose i may wing him?”

he touched his rifle as he spoke 

“you’ll do exactly as you’re told ”

sir clinton evidently had no wish to be distracted from his main
problem  his voice had a ring in it which impressed even arthur 

“what’s it all about?” he demanded from wendover  in a lowered tone 

“your uncle’s the murderer  it seems  and sir clinton’s got him
trapped in the maze ”

arthur looked at him in amazement 

“i say  you know  wendover  that’ll take a bit of thinking over  won’t
it?”

he said no more  and wendover could believe that arthur  like himself 
was conning over the whole of the whistlefield case  and being brought
up against the apparent impossibilities of the chief constable’s
solution of the problem  at length arthur lifted his head again 

“well  if he didn’t do it  he has only to come out and say so  if he
didn’t do it       ”

his voice died away into silence  then he added 

“i promised myself to square up for sylvia  and i’ll do that  no
matter who the man is ”

he dropped his rifle to the order and waited patiently for the next
move  keeping his eyes fixed on the impenetrable hedges of the maze 

sir clinton waited for a few minutes longer  then he seemed to have
exhausted the limit which he had set for himself 

“you see the situation?” he demanded  turning to the others  “he’s in
there  he refuses to come out  we’ve got to get him ”

“i suppose you’re going to starve him out?” wendover inquired  as sir
clinton stopped short 

“too risky  he might get away in the dark when night comes on  i don’t
say he could  but i’m going to take no risks ”

“then i suppose we’ll need to go into the maze and dig him out ”
wendover suggested  philosophically 

sir clinton dissented with a nod 

“i’m responsible for the lives of my constables ” he said  “i can take
some brands of responsibility quick enough  but i won’t shoulder the
liability of sending good men to hunt armed vermin through a maze like
that  they know nothing about its paths  he knows every inch of it  it
would be sheer murder if i gave orders of that sort  no  there’s a
better way  but bear in mind that i gave him the chance of surrender
first of all ”

arthur fidgeted with his rifle 

“i know the maze as well as he does ” he pointed out  “i could get him
out easily enough if you’d let me take on the job ”

sir clinton negatived the suggestion curtly 

“i’ve got a better ferret than you  my boy  if he gets driven into the
open and looks like escaping  i’ll let you wing him  but that’s all
you are to do ”

he wetted his finger and held it up in the air 

“couldn’t be better  there’s just a faint drift in the air  you’ve got
the stuff over by the boat house?” he added  turning to the constable 
“right  we’ll go across  then  but keep well away from the maze as we
go  for the beast may be hiding behind the outermost hedge trying to
draw a bead on us as we pass ”

considerably mystified  wendover followed sir clinton towards the
river bank  when they reached the neighbourhood of the boat house  he
was still more astonished to find a number of sacks lying on the
grass  evidently filled with some material  three spades were grouped
close by  again sir clinton held up his moistened finger and gauged
the direction of the light airs that were blowing  then  seeing the
surprised faces of his companions  he pointed to the sacks 

“my ferret!”

ardsley had gone over and inspected one of the bags  he rubbed his
finger on the outside of one and then inspected the skin with
interest  then  suddenly  he laughed grimly 

“sulphur! that’s a cute notion  a ferret!”

sir clinton acknowledged the discovery with a smile that had more than
a touch of the sinister in it 

“simple  isn’t it?”

“quite the mikado touch ” ardsley commented 

sir clinton said no more  but busied himself with giving orders to his
subordinates  wendover had grasped the meaning of the interchange
between ardsley and the chief constable  sir clinton meant to use the
simplest poison gas of all—the fumes of burning sulphur  the light
air currents would drift them over the maze  and ernest shandon would
soon find his fastness converted into a death trap  he would have to
come out into the open  and by that time he would be in such a state
that he could be easily captured 

sir clinton had issued his directions  posting his constables at
points from which they could converge on the various entrances to the
maze if necessary 

“take no risks ” he added  finally  “i don’t want any fancy exploits
to day  the man who gets shandon and suffers no damage in getting him 
will be the man who gets a good mark from me  i’ll not have anyone
hurt  understand!”

he dismissed the constables to carry his orders to their comrades  and
then swung round to the rest of the group 

“you can get over yonder  to that clump of rhododendrons  hawkhurst 
if he shows up anywhere within your zone of fire  you’re to wing him 
you’re not to kill him  i’m trusting you to play the game  remember ”

arthur nodded  and betook himself to his post 

“two more guns will cover all but this side of the maze ” sir clinton
went on  “you go over to the road  wendover  from there ” he pointed 
“you can cover young hawkhurst’s dead ground  i’ll do the same on the
other side  but first of all  we’ve got to get this stuff spread
around a bit ”

he cut the twine at the mouth of the sacks  tilted out the sulphur 
and began to distribute it with a spade  the others hurried to assist
him  and spread the yellow lumps under his directions 

“now we can light up ” sir clinton said  at last  when things had been
completed to his satisfaction  “these fireworks will give the thing a
good start if you spray the sparks to and fro over the surface of the
stuff ”

he produced some fireworks from a paper parcel as he spoke and set an
example to his companions  soon the sulphur caught fire  and wendover 
incautiously working on the leeward side  began to cough violently 

“keep to the windward side of the stuff ” sir clinton advised  “get it
alight here and there  the flame will soon spread over the whole
surface  now  i’m off ”

he picked up his shot gun and skirted the maze at a respectful
distance as he made his way to his post  for a minute or two wendover
stolidly continued to tend the “ferret”  but he could not help
wondering whether this method of criminal hunting really came within
permitted bounds  his mind inclined more readily to active measures 
and the devil’s cookery was  as he phrased it to ardsley  “hardly the
game ”

the toxicologist showed no sympathy with his point of view 

“driffield’s quite right  suppose to night found him with a dead
constable on his hands—perhaps a widow and some fatherless children to
face? would you care to be in his shoes? i wouldn’t! play the game?
bosh! it’s not playing the game to chuck away your men’s lives
unnecessarily ”

he dug up some burning sulphur and distributed it over an unkindled
patch 

“whew! this is a suffocating job! if it’s like this now it’ll be
fairly stifling on the lee side in half an hour ”

stenness said nothing  wendover  who was not in the secret of the
secretary’s love affairs  could not understand why stenness looked
almost as grim as sir clinton  the squire woke up all at once to the
fact that he ought to be elsewhere  and he made his way to his
appointed post 

as he reached it  the report of the sporting rifle came from the clump
of rhododendrons 

“it’s all right ” he heard arthur’s voice raised in a shouted
explanation  “i saw him at the gate  trying to climb over  so i let
him have it above his head  that scared him  he’s gone away now  back
into the maze  he’s got a pistol in his hand ”

almost at once they heard sir clinton’s shot gun fired 

“trying the entrances one by one to see if he can slip out ” commented
arthur  with a certain malicious glee in his tone 

some minutes passed  then  to wendover’s astonishment  he heard the
crack of the automatic pistol  and a bullet sang past him 

“not much sign of surrender about that ” he admitted  as he got
hurriedly under cover  “the beggar must have marked me down and tried
a long shot through the hedge ”

time flowed slowly on  occasionally  with a slight change in the faint
wind  some of the sulphur fumes drifted down to wendover and caught
his lungs 

“it must be pretty thick in the maze  if a mere whiff of it gives one
gyp like that ” he reflected  “the beggar must be half dead with the
fumes by this time  for he gets the full blast of it ”

another interval of quietness gave wendover time to think over the
situation  up to that point  he had gone through the business almost
without trying to bring the morning’s work into touch with normal
life  the whole affair had had an impersonal quality  for from start
to finish he had not set eyes on the man they were hunting  but that
peculiarity had enhanced the rather unreal character of the adventure 
lending it a touch of the fantastic in his mind  and the
extraordinarily methodical procedure which had governed the
transactions helped in some way to accentuate his feelings  it had all
been as logical as a nightmare seems to be while one lives through it 

yet another shot gun report—from the sulphur station this time—showed
that the murderer was still making attempts to slip away  after that 
another period elapsed without any further alarms  the sulphur fumes
were now so dense that wendover  though out of the main line of drift 
was becoming seriously troubled by them  he could hear arthur coughing
continuously in the rhododendron clump  but the muzzle of the rifle
was never lowered even in the worst paroxysm  quite obviously arthur
meant to miss no chance of squaring the account for sylvia 

as that thought crossed his mind  wendover seemed to see the whole
whistlefield case in a fresh light  instead of the mysterious murderer
lurking behind green walls of the maze  his mental vision threw up a
picture of the real personality  ernest shandon  he could see him with
his mind’s eye wandering along the paths of the maze  choking 
desperate  seeking for some outlet to safety and beaten back each time
by the warning of the guns  and minute by minute the poison cloud was
growing denser over his place of refuge  bringing nearer the
inevitable end of the drama 

and as this picture forced itself upon wendover  he began to feel the
nightmare growing more intense  it seemed almost incredible that
ernest shandon  a creature despised by everyone for his shiftlessness
and futility  could have planned and carried through this murderous
work  wendover  since he had been brought into intimate contact with
ernest  had felt nothing but boredom and derision  the man’s dullness 
his cowardice  his selfishness  had all impressed themselves strongly
on the squire  and had produced a definite feeling of repulsion and
contempt  now he had to readjust his ideas  the dullness must have
beef merely an exaggeration  the cowardice had been a sham  since the
murderer had no reason to fear anything for his own skin  and the
selfishness—why  that was only a manifestation of callousness without
which no planned murder could be carried through  instead of the
insignificant figure which he had hitherto encountered  wendover began
to see instead a fresh personality hidden behind the mask  something
going coldly to its deadly work  unrestrained by any normal feelings
of humanity or even kinship  a modern minotaur in the labyrinth of the
maze 

almost appalled by the vividness of the portrait which his mind had
conjured up  wendover stared across the grass at the wall of greenery
which concealed from his gaze the actual form of the murderer  then 
as he gazed  there came once more the report of the automatic pistol—a
single shot 

and once more the waiting recommenced  unbroken by any incident 

at last sir clinton appeared  with his gun at the trail  round the
corner of the maze  he signalled to wendover and arthur to rejoin him 

“i think that’s the end of the business ” he said with stern
satisfaction  as they came up  “if i’m not much mistaken  that last
shot was for himself  the game was up  and he must have been half dead
with the fumes by now ”

he turned to arthur 

“do you see now why i wouldn’t let you touch him? if you had  then
we’d have had all the bother of a trial for manslaughter at the least 
and i don’t guarantee that things would have gone smoothly in it  as
it is  he’s suicided  and no one’s to blame but himself  and if you
wanted to put the screw on him  could you have given it a harder turn
than this?”

he pointed towards the sulphur station 

arthur saw the point 

“i expect you’re right ” he admitted  coughing as a fresh cloud of
fumes drifted down upon them  “he must have had his dose before he
gave in  you think that there’s no doubt that he’s shot himself?”

sir clinton’s face showed what he thought 

“well  i tell you what ” arthur proposed  “there’s a tree near the
river bank which overlooks part of the maze if one gets high enough in
it  suppose i swarm up it and see if i can spot anything? now that
he’s out of action  it’s safe enough ”

sir clinton welcomed the idea 

“that’s a good scheme  he might be shamming  after all  and i won’t
take any risks by sending anyone into the maze till i’m sure  if you
keep well inside the leaves you’ll be safe enough in any case  and if
you find he’s dead  it’ll save us a long wait ”

arthur dropped his rifle and went off to put his project into
execution  after he had gone sir clinton turned to wendover 

“not much family affection left in the whistlefield circle  squire 
but can you wonder  after all  friend ernest wasn’t the sort of man
who’d attract much liking at the best  and that boy was very keen on
his sister  undoubtedly  i have a certain sympathy with his feelings 
and i can tell you i’ve been on pins and needles for some time back
lest young hawkhurst should find out who the murderer really was and
take the law into his own hands at once  he wouldn’t have been hanged 
of course  that mental instability of his would have saved him  but it
would have been a case for broadmoor  and that’s not much better than
the drop in his state  it’s a relief to get it all over as easily as
we have done ”

in a few minutes  arthur came back with his report 

“he’s lying on the ground in helen’s bower  i couldn’t see very
clearly  but from the way he’s lying  i think he’s done for ”

“well ” said sir clinton  “i’d better get into the maze and make sure
of things ”

he reflected for a moment  then added 

“i think perhaps it would be as well if all of us went in together 
it’s quite safe  i’m pretty sure of that  and there’s something there 
i suspect  that i shall want witnesses for ”

he summoned ardsley and stenness and explained the state of affairs to
them 

“if we dowse the sulphur  the wind will clear away the fumes fairly
soon  we can get water from the river and put it out  there’s sure to
be something in the boat house which we can use for bringing water—a
bucket or a bailer of some sort!”

when it seemed safe  they entered the maze and soon reached helen’s
bower  no danger awaited them  ernest’s body lay sprawling on the
grass with a bullet wound in the head and the automatic pistol still
clutched in the hand  sir clinton crossed over and knelt down beside
the corpse 

“we’d better search the body now and be done with it ” he said 
beginning the task as he spoke 

“here’s something bulky in the breast pocket ” he explained as he
extracted it  “h’m! an envelope with your name written on it 
stenness  your property  perhaps?”

stenness glanced at the paper and a look of intelligence passed
between him and sir clinton 

“that’s mine ” he confirmed  “it ought to have notes in it!”

the chief constable thrust his fingers into the envelope and  pulling
out some of the contents  exhibited them to the company 

“it’s full of notes—must be a fair sum  i’ll keep this for the
present  stenness  you don’t mind? it’s best to do things formally 
and you can always have it later on when you want it ”

“oh  keep it  certainly ” stenness agreed  with a certain dull
indifference 

sir clinton continued his search  but the only thing of interest was a
tin box which he opened carefully and held out for inspection 

“more of these darts  you see?”

he counted them rapidly 

“yes  that’s right  this represents the balance of the lot after
deducting the ones he used in the attack on miss hawkhurst and last
night ”

he replaced the cover on the box and transferred the thing to his
pocket 

“that’s all we need do  you’d better have a look at the body  ardsley 
we’ll need your evidence at the inquest  i’ll send a constable in here
to look after things until we can get the body removed ”

when ardsley had finished his examination  they left the maze 

“go back to the house now ” sir clinton directed  as they emerged from
the entrance gate  “i’ll have to pilot my men in to the centre  you
know  you can send the car down to meet me if you like ”

he turned back with the constables  while the rest of the party got
into the motor  no one seemed inclined to talk  as they made their way
up to the house  the events of the morning had been too bizarre to
merge easily into everyday affairs  to wendover  it seemed as though
he had spent the last hour or two in some world lying far beyond the
normal bounds of probability—already the siege of the maze was passing
into the realm of the unreal in his mind  and he had difficulty in
forcing himself to remember that it had cost the life of a man 

but even while he reflected on this  a fresh surprise came upon him 
as the car swept round in sight of the main entrance to whistlefield 
he heard a sharp intake of breath from stenness and a suppressed
exclamation from arthur 

he raised his eyes  and for a moment could hardly believe what he saw 
there  at the top of the steps  stood torrance and vera forrest  while
between them was sylvia  safe and sound except for the sling which
supported her right arm 

“rather a surprise  i suppose ” said ardsley dryly  as he pulled up
the car at the front door 



chapter xviii 

the truth of the matter

wendover brought out cigars and cigarettes  and endeavoured to make
his guests as comfortable as possible without too much fuss  it was
some days after the affair at the maze which had ended in ernest
shandon’s suicide  and sir clinton had asked his host to invite
stenness and ardsley to dinner  the squire had at first objected to
the toxicologist  for his prejudices were quite unabated  but sir
clinton had made it clear that ardsley’s presence was essential from
his point of view  and wendover had given way without too much
argument  dinner had passed off without any friction  for the squire
was not the sort of person to abuse his position as a host 

sir clinton picked out a cigar and cut it with some care 

“i hear we may congratulate you on your engagement  stenness ” he
said  “i suppose it’s rather early to ask when you’re going to be
married?”

stenness looked across the room  rather as though he were in doubt
about the intention behind the question 

“i’ll have to make some money first ” he answered  “one can’t live on
somebody else’s income ”

sir clinton laughed 

“some people don’t seem to find it so hard as all that  but if that’s
your difficulty  perhaps i could do something for you  i’ve some small
influence in south africa  and it so happens that a man out there
asked me to look round for someone to fill a post  the pay’s good
enough to marry on  i’ll come across to morrow to whistlefield in the
morning and talk to you about it  my impression is that it would suit
you  and it has one big advantage  it would take you both out of your
old surroundings and make a clean break with all this affair  which
would hang round your neck if you stayed in this country  people will
talk  no matter what happens  and miss hawkhurst couldn’t help knowing
they were talking if she stayed on here ”

he paused to light his cigar before he continued 

“and that brings me to my reason for getting you people together
to night  none of you are likely to talk  but you’d be hardly human if
you didn’t think about this whistlefield affair  and it’s on the cards
that you might fall into misapprehensions over it  which might lead to
difficulties  i’ve come to the conclusion that it will be better if
you know all that i know myself about it  and i think that will clear
the whole thing up and let you get it out of your minds  once a
puzzle’s solved  no one troubles about it any more  but even a trace
of mystery will keep one worrying spasmodically and so one can’t put
the matter aside for good ”

he glanced round the group and he could see that his suggestion met
with the approval of them all 

“very well  you must bear in mind  first of all  that i’m going to
give you a mixture of facts and theories  i can’t guarantee that every
detail will be absolutely accurate  for some of it’s guess work on my
part ”

“go ahead ” said wendover  “we understand that well enough ”

“one thing that most people forget when they read about a police case
in the papers ” continued sir clinton  “is the handicap of local
knowledge  on the face of it  any one of you three had a better chance
than i had of getting to the bottom of the whistlefield affair  all of
you had some knowledge of the characters of the people involved  each
of you at any rate knew his own part in the business  but a detective
coming in from the outside sees nothing before him but a group of
strangers with totally unpredictable qualities  he has all that
lee way to make up before he even starts level with you—and he hasn’t
much time to pick up his information ”

“that’s true ” said stenness  thoughtfully  “i’d never looked at it in
that light  the police have a harder job than i thought ”

“there’s a countervailing advantage  of course ” sir clinton hastened
to admit  “a detective comes to a case with no preconceived ideas
about character  the actors are all strangers to him  and he has to
depend on his wits and his judgment entirely  that was my position
when i came into the whistlefield case  i knew none of you personally 
and i was quite free from prejudices about you ”

“facts are more important than opinions in a case of this sort  so
that really leaves a balance in your favour ” ardsley suggested 

“quite true—once you’ve got your facts ” sir clinton agreed  “now
let’s take the facts in the order that they presented themselves  the
things i saw when i was called to the maze were plain enough  an
airgun had been used to fire poisoned darts  roger shandon had been
hit in the shoulders and the neck  neville shandon had been struck
rather lower down in the body  there had been no attempt at robbery 
except for the tearing away of the sheet of notes in neville’s hand 
loopholes had been cut in the hedge  evidently beforehand—for no one
would start cutting loopholes with his victim a few yards away  a box
of darts had been spilt at the loophole from which roger shandon was
shot  the murderer had managed to dodge either miss forrest or young
torrance  or both of them  as he made his way out of the maze 
finally  my dog proved that the murderer had followed a very
round about track in leaving the maze  he got out near the river bank 
he went across to a clump of trees  on one of which there was a mark
about three feet off the ground  then he had gone across the grass to
the road  and when he reached the road  his trail stopped short ”

“yes ” wendover interjected  “you talked a lot of rot about the
murderer getting into his private aeroplane and flying away  i
remember ”

sir clinton smiled slightly 

“i was near enough for all practical purposes  as you’ll see  squire 
now we come to what i thought it reasonable to infer from the facts 
first of all  an air gun can be fired by either a man or a woman  so
the weapon didn’t even suggest the sex of the criminal  the poison was
obviously going to be a good clue  for it made the crime abnormal  so
to speak  and the more uncommon the method is in a murder  the more
you limit the possibilities in the identity of the murderer  next  it
was clear enough that roger had been shot while he was sitting in his
chair with his back to the murderer  in that position  only his
shoulders and neck would be exposed as targets and it was there that
he was hit  neville  on the other hand  had been shot from the front
or slightly to the side  that suggested the possibility that roger
might have been killed in mistake for neville  whereas neville could
not have been mistaken for roger  since the murderer  shooting from
the front or side  could see his face as he fired ”

“did you lay much stress on that in your mind?” stenness asked 

“not much at the time  it suggested that roger might have been killed
first of all  by mistake  and that neville was the man the murderer
was really after  but alone  it amounted to very little  then comes
the fact that nothing seemed to have been removed from either body 
except the notes torn out of neville’s hand  of course  i’d been
following the hackleton case  and it was clear enough that neville
shandon might have been put out of the way to keep him from examining
hackleton  that’s been done before—remember how maître labori was shot
in the back as he was going into court to examine general mercier
during the dreyfus case  i merely docketed that in my memory and kept
an open mind on the point  i hadn’t enough data to make it worth while
doing more 

“the next point was the discovery of the loopholes  that established
premeditation—the crime had been thought out and prepared for
beforehand  and that meant  further  that the murderer was someone who
knew that one or other of the shandons was likely to be in the maze
that afternoon or at least at some time thereabouts  that looked like
a local criminal at first sight  but one has to be judicial  and it
was clear enough that a premeditated crime might have been preceded by
a good deal of quiet spying  and thus an outsider might have got to
know the shandons’ habits  one couldn’t lay much stress on that ”

“so at that point you didn’t know whether the hackleton case came in
or not?” stenness asked 

“no  i simply kept an open mind on the point  now the next thing was
the box of darts which skene found scattered about  that was easy
enough to read  the murderer must have fumbled while he was shooting
roger—because the box was at roger’s loophole  he was in a deadly
hurry  or he’d have picked them up then  evidently he’d something else
to do in a hurry and he meant to come back for the darts  isn’t it
clear enough that when he’d shot roger  he saw the face after he’d
fired  and he realised he’d hit the wrong man  neville had still to be
reckoned with—and it looks to me as if the murderer had counted on
neville being in the maze just then  i expect he had private
information  so he grabbed three darts from the ground and rushed off
to finish neville  which he did  neville may have been alarmed by
something  which would account for his standing up when he was shot
at  then the murderer proposes to go back for his lost darts  but now
he finds someone else in the maze  he hears voices  probably he finds
his road back to helen’s bower blocked by these strangers  so he runs
as hard as he can to get rid of his air gun  which is the deadly
evidence against him  but he gets into difficulties in avoiding these
unknown people in the maze and it takes him some time to get out ”

“did you suspect anyone in particular at that point?” wendover
interrupted 

“it might have been young torrance  of course ” sir clinton admitted 
“he might have doubled his own part with that of the murderer  i kept
an open mind ”

“i suppose it might have been miss forrest  if you take everyone into
account ” ardsley commented 

“i didn’t speculate much at the time ” sir clinton answered  “what
really started me thinking definitely was the clue that my dog gave
us  he led us  you remember  by a very winding track through the
maze—evidently the turnings and windings were due to the murderer
dodging someone in the alleys  then we came near the river—that
suggested that he flung away his air gun into the water as he passed 
then the dog led us to a tree in a small clump near by  wendover
noticed a mark on the trunk of the tree  about three feet off the
ground  and he suggested that it had been made by the boot of the
murderer while he was trying to climb the tree  but after that the
trail went on and reached the road—and there it stopped dead  the dog
simply baulked there  it found nothing further ”

sir clinton paused for a moment to let this point sink in 

“a trail can only stop dead in that way for either of two reasons 
first  a man may stand still and wait  but since the man wasn’t there
he obviously hadn’t waited  the only other way in which a thing like
that could happen is by the man getting into the air off the road at
that point ”

“ha! the private aeroplane  i suppose ” said wendover sarcastically 

sir clinton’s retort crushed the squire slightly 

“or the private motor—or even the humble push bike  if you step into a
car or get on to a bicycle your trail will stop so far as footsteps
are concerned ”

wendover admitted the hit 

“what an ass i was not to see that at once  and of course the road was
bone hard and had no dust on it  so he left no track of his tyres?”

“none that i could swear to  now that bicycle settled a good deal  it
cleared at once torrance  miss forrest  and most probably costock as
well  i may say at once that i never took costock seriously  he’s a
miserable creature who couldn’t screw himself up to murder if he
tried  i had him watched  but i never really suspected him of anything
beyond a futile attempt at blackmailing roger shandon  he hadn’t even
the nerve for that  his pistol was really for self defence against
shandon  i’m sure  just as he said it was ”

wendover harked back to the problem of the track 

“you seem very sure it was a bicycle and not a motor car ”

“isn’t it fairly certain?” sir clinton asked  “if the murderer had
used a car  he’d have been seen by the lodge keepers if he left the
grounds—at least he’d have run that risk  but a bicycle can be carried
off the road by hand and taken through a gap in a hedge quite easily 
since the murderer evidently would not want to be seen  the bicycle is
the obvious thing  call it a bicycle  anyway  for convenience just
now  my trouble was that i couldn’t prove which way the bicycle went 
whether it went towards the house or towards the east gate  i left the
matter alone for the time  hoping for something else to turn up  of
course  i set my men at work to hunt for any bicycle that had been
concealed in the grounds  but they failed to find it ”

“why didn’t you make inquiries about bicycles at whistlefield?”
wendover demanded 

“because i wanted to keep my thumb on the bicycle question  i didn’t
want to get the name of being too clever—so far as the murderer was
concerned  it was far better to let him think his method was
undetected ”

“so at that point ” stenness put in  “you didn’t know whether the
murderer had gone back to the house or had gone outside the grounds?”

“no ” sir clinton admitted  “i didn’t  the next thing  if you
remember  was my visit to the house and my interviews with various
people  yourself included  bear in mind that at that time  i didn’t
know whether the murderer was one of the house group or had come in
like a bolt from the blue from outside  i had to get that point
cleared up as soon as possible  and it offered a good deal of
difficulty 

“when i came to interview the various people at the house  it was
simply a case of meeting a number of strangers for the first time  i
had to pick up what i could  and at the same time take care not to be
prejudiced by initial impressions  that’s more difficult than you’d
think  torrance and miss forrest were cleared already  so i did not
need to pay much attention to them  apart from their evidence  you 
stenness  gave me a bit of trouble  i admit  i couldn’t quite make you
out at that time ”

stenness acknowledged this with a faint smile  sir clinton hastened on
with his narrative without giving either of the others a chance of
interrupting 

“arthur hawkhurst caused me some thought  though  stenness gave me a
hint about his attack of sleepy sickness  he came in with an air gun
in his hand  he seemed an irresponsible sort of boy  but that was all 
there’s a big chasm between that and homicidal mania  i simply
docketed him in my memory and left the matter there ”

at this point sir clinton seemed to find his narrative growing more
interesting to himself  he pulled himself up in his chair and glanced
round his audience before taking up the next part of his subject 

“ernest shandon was the final figure—for  of course  i dismissed miss
hawkhurst at once  now at first sight  friend ernest was an
unattractive fellow  first  he was obviously callous in the extreme 
he didn’t seem sorry about his brothers’ deaths  his sore toe bulked
far more prominently in his conversation  that seemed a bit grotesque
to me at the time  it stuck in my memory on that account alone  then 
second  he seemed absolutely selfish  his ego seemed to be the only
thing that really interested him  he wanted his tea  and he meant to
have it  too  that seemed a bit abnormal  though one can’t hang a man
for wanting his tea  of course  third  he gave me the impression of
being one of the dullest and stupidest men that one could wish to
meet  altogether  one would say  there wasn’t much to be got out of a
person of that type  dull  selfish  callous  and stupid  and yet  if
you look back now  you’ll see that the whole basis of the shandon
tragedies lies in just those qualities  it’ll be quite clear when we
come to it 

“i’ve pointed out that my difficulty was to fix as soon as possible
whether this was ‘an inside job’ or one carried through by an
outsider  also  quite possibly there might be more trouble at
whistlefield  now i’d taken particular care to note that the murderer
knew the maze thoroughly  so as a wild shot i dropped the hint about
ariadne’s clue—the thread which would guide a man through the maze if
he didn’t know it very well  i flung that down casually  i hadn’t
really much hope of doing much with it  for i hardly believed in
further trouble then  but it would do no harm  so i dropped the
suggestion in presence of some of the possible criminals ”

“h’m! now i begin to see some light ” wendover commented 

“the next point was the nature of the poison ” sir clinton went on 
“the local doctor suggested you  ardsley  as an expert  so i went over
at once to get your views  once i knew it was curare  i felt i’d got
something definite enough to go on  that isn’t common stuff  of course
you probably had a stock yourself  and i didn’t feel inclined to
interfere with you  i thought it fairly clear that if you had gone on
the murder tack you’d have avoided a stuff which could be traced to
you directly  so i asked about any other local source  and you put me
on to the pot in the whistlefield museum 

“that put a different complexion on the whole case  it was evidently
essential to get hold of that supply immediately  if the murderer had
drawn a private stock from the pot  we couldn’t help that  if he had
just used enough to poison his darts  then we could stop further
supplies by confiscating the pot  so i packed you and wendover off to
secure it ”

“wendover being to watch me  i suppose?” ardsley put in with a grim
smile 

“i won’t deny it  you’d have done the same in my place ” sir clinton
pointed out 

“why didn’t you come yourself?” wendover inquired 

“because i’d something else on hand that had to be done in a hurry  i
must confess frankly that i’d nothing definite to go on  it was mere
intuition  if you like  or you can call it a case of taking
precautions against eventualities which one doesn’t expect to occur 
it was rather like the business of ariadne’s clue—a long shot which
might come off  and i thought it had more chance of bearing fruit 
these poisoned darts were clues of a sort  they were also weapons  so
if the murderer got a chance of grabbing them  i thought he might be
tempted  but i wasn’t going to let him have the real things  not
likely  i gave him a substitute  quite similar in appearance  but
really quite harmless  then if he tried any more of his games  the
chances were that he’d use the darts i gave him  and do no great harm
with them  even if he had one or two deadly darts left  he’d be sure
to mix the lot together  and that reduced the risk of poison in a dart
chosen at random from the mixture of deadly and harmless ones 

“so  when we were passing through the village  i got you to drop me 
wendover  and i bought some darts  drilled them like the deadly ones 
faked them to match with condy’s fluid  put some litmus in so as to
make my lot easily recognisable by a simple test  and then i was
ready  incidentally  i think i got the reputation of being quite mad 
i needed a tin to keep the deadly darts in—i wasn’t going to have them
loose in my pocket—and i had to leave the real tin for the murderer to
pick up if he wanted  so i sent out for some navy cut  used the tins
for the lethal darts  and staggered the sergeant down there by
presenting him with the tobacco  he’s still puzzling over it  i guess 

“you know what happened next  i left the sham darts on the mantelpiece
of the museum purposely  and the murderer lifted them  now as ardsley
didn’t touch them—he went out of the room in front of me and they were
still lying there—and as wendover wasn’t the murderer  that left only
you  stenness  and miss hawkhurst  young hawkhurst and ernest shandon 
as possible thieves  if the tin vanished  then i had got down to
pretty narrow limits ”

“i see you’d ruled me out by that time ” ardsley said 

“oh  practically ” sir clinton agreed  “of course my convictions were
quite fluid still  i was quite prepared to reconsider things at any
time  the next point was to go over the alibis as well as i could 
wendover gave me a hand with that  once one got into that matter  it
was clear enough that the only possible suspects were yourself 
stenness  young hawkhurst  you  ardsley—because i knew nothing about
your doings that day—and finally  somebody with a bicycle  but once
you bring in the bicycle  ernest shandon’s alibi falls to bits  i’ll
show you how 

“this is my reconstruction of the murders in the maze  i don’t say
it’s correct in every detail—only the main outlines are really
important  ernest shandon went off with miss hawkhurst in the car  i
suspect that he knew his brothers were going to the maze that
afternoon  he’d already taken his bicycle along and concealed it in a
little plantation near the east gate  and he’d hidden the air gun
there as well 

“he got off the car at the east gate  walked along the road quickly 
and got through the hedge into the plantation  he took out his bicycle
and the air gun and pedalled as hard as he could go for the maze  his
one risk was meeting someone on the road  if he’d done that  he’d have
had to postpone his affair until another day  he met no one—it’s a
road hardly anyone walks on  i believe  he got to the maze  went in to
his loophole commanding helen’s bower  there he saw someone whom he
took to be neville shandon  i suspect that he had the hackleton case
at the back of his mind during the planning  and he meant to make it
appear that neville had been killed on that account  you know
yourselves what a troublesome false trail it turned out to be at the
start 

“my belief is that he was sweating like a pig owing to his sprint up
to the maze—you must remember that his whole alibi depended on the
time factor and he hadn’t a moment to waste  very likely his nose was
greasy and he had trouble with his glasses  you remember they were
always going askew or falling off? however it happened  he didn’t
recognise roger from behind  and he shot him first of all  he shot him
in the neck  and i am led to suppose that roger didn’t cry out 
because the heavy dose of curare paralysed his vocal muscles almost
immediately 

“then  as roger fell  ernest recognised that he’d blundered  he’d
killed the wrong man  and the hackleton business wouldn’t serve to
complicate this case  i expect he got flustered—and no great wonder  i
suppose he dropped the darts  his glasses fell off  and altogether he
was in a pretty state of confusion  and there was still neville to
finish off 

“at that moment  he’d no idea that the maze wasn’t empty except for
neville in the other centre  so he abandoned his darts after grabbing
three from the ground  and he went off to kill his other brother
before anything more happened  bear in mind that speed was everything
to him  and you’ll get some idea of the flurry he must have been in  i
expect he meant to come back for the spilt darts and the tin as soon
as he’d finished neville 

“we know from the evidence of torrance and miss forrest that the first
murder passed unnoticed so far as they were concerned  they didn’t
even pay any attention to the reports of the air gun in roger’s case 
considering the queer acoustics of the maze  there’s nothing wonderful
in that  but i think it’s likely enough that neville shandon had heard
something  and ernest just got him as he was standing up and wondering
if he shouldn’t hunt about for the cause of the funny noise he had
heard 

“whatever the details were  ernest got him all right  but he shot him
in the body and neville was able to give a yell or two before he
collapsed  that accounts for the cries that miss forrest heard and
also for the air gun noises  and with that  friend ernest’s little
troubles suddenly increased  for he heard voices in the maze as these
two called to each other  and he must have known he was up against
it ”

sir clinton’s voice became grave 

“it was a bit of sheer luck that he came across neither of those two
on his way out  he’d have shot them without any hesitation if he
could  my reading of it is that he was hindered in two ways  first 
he’d used up all his darts and daren’t waste time and risk detection
by going back for those that he’d spilt  secondly  he was losing
time—and time was the essence of his alibi  so he dodged about  no
doubt suffering agonies of terror  and at last he got out of the maze
safely  undetected  he pitched his gun into the water at once and went
for his bicycle  in lifting it  he scraped the tree with the
brake handle  i think  he wouldn’t be in a state to do things
cautiously  that was the mark wendover noticed  he carried his bicycle
across the grass so as not to leave the track of crushed stems that
he’d have made if he’d wheeled it  and then  once on the road  he
mounted—and his trail stopped  so far as the dog was concerned 

“he sprinted down the road to near the east gate  carried his machine
into the plantation  and concealed it  i set my men to hunt for it 
but they didn’t find it  it’s pure theory  but i think it’s quite
likely he had some tackle ready and hoisted the thing up into a tree 
no ordinary country constable would ever think of looking up into the
air for a bicycle  and it would be well hidden among the leaves  but
that’s mere conjecture 

“once clear of the bicycle  he got through the hedge again on to the
public road  hurried along it as far as he could and then sat down by
the wayside to wait for the postman’s cart  which he knew was due to
pass along at a fixed time  when the postman came  he had his yarn
ready about his sore toe and all the rest of it ”

“that’s remarkably neat ” said ardsley  “but if i’d been in your shoes
i wouldn’t have given ernest shandon credit for as much brains as all
that ”

“you must remember that i knew nothing about his brains ” sir clinton
pointed out  “i’d only seen him in circumstances where one doesn’t
expect brains to come out very strong in most cases  i kept an open
mind about him  all i admitted to myself was that ernest shandon
hadn’t a cast iron alibi after all ”

“very sound ” ardsley commended  “you ought to be in the scientific
line  driffield  some of us aren’t so cautious ”

“then came the burglary ” sir clinton went on  “on the face of it  it
was possibly genuine  possibly a fake  it might have been a real
attempt to get at something connected with the hackleton case  or it
might have been the usual blunder of a murderer trying to strengthen
the case against someone else  i didn’t know at the moment  but when
miss hawkhurst gave me back the tin of darts that morning and when i’d
found by testing them that they weren’t my faked darts  then i had a
pretty fair notion how things stood  the murderer had been careful not
to steal the tin of darts outright  he’d given me back some  darts 
right enough  they had been faked like mine  only they hadn’t my
litmus in them 

“that told me two things straight away  the murderer was one of the
people in the museum that night and—much more important than that—he
had work still to do  for he wanted those darts at any price  that
gave me some worry  i can tell you  for i couldn’t be absolutely
certain that his teeth were drawn  he might have had a deadly dart or
two in reserve for all i knew  it was a stiff business to be up
against  and really i didn’t feel comfortable ”

“was that the time you were so perplexed?” wendover asked 

“yes ”

“i don’t wonder at it now ”

sir clinton brushed this aside 

“now i’m coming to ernest shandon’s first big mistake  in telling me
the story of the burglary  he dragged in a tale about the transactions
relating to his late brother ”

stenness showed no outward sign of perturbation  but sir clinton could
see he was uneasy as to the next stage of the narrative  with a
glance  the chief constable reassured him  stenness  realising that
his affairs would not be brought in  leaned back again in his chair 

“i needn’t go into details about the thing ” sir clinton continued 
“all i need say is that it would take a pretty smart man to spot what
ernest had spotted  and so  naturally  i reconsidered my ideas about
friend ernest  he wasn’t an ass after all—not by any means  that set
me thinking hard  and what made me think harder was his evident desire
to throw suspicion on you  stenness  he tried to persuade
me—indirectly—that he was in fear of his life from you ”

“from me?” stenness asked in amazement 

“i’m telling you the facts ” sir clinton contented himself with
pointing out  “well  the next business was the news that ernest
himself had been attacked in the maze  and at that point i began to
feel pretty sure of my ground  it was the most obvious line he could
have taken to divert suspicion from himself  and  what made me more
uneasy  it was a possible preliminary to an attack on someone else 
he’d killed his two brothers  if a third attack was made  he might
come under suspicion—and a breath of suspicion might be enough  so he
boldly faked up an attack on himself next  then  if still another
attempt was made  who would suspect the poor victim who had nearly
lost his life just a few days earlier?”

“one has to admit he showed some acuteness ” ardsley said  drily 

“at that point the case began to clear up a little in my mind 
assuming ernest to be the murderer  what was he after? the more i
thought about it the clearer it seemed that cash must be at the bottom
of the affair  he wanted money  he’d never worked in his life  how
could he lay his hands on cash? and of course it was as plain as
anything then  if he could kill off his brothers he’d inherit part of
their money—i learned that pretty easily from the fact that there were
no near relations except himself  arthur and miss hawkhurst  but the
craving for money isn’t easily satisfied  obviously  if he could
eliminate his nephew and niece  he’d be left with not only the whole
of his two brothers’ fortunes  but the hawkhurst money as well 

“if you look into criminology  you’ll find that the murderer for money
reasons is a fairly definite type  he’s usually clever enough to
devise a fresh method of murder  or of disposing of the body  apart
from that  he’s not a very brainy type  and he has a terrible knack of
repeating the same method in successive crimes  suppose you have to
cross a boiling torrent by stepping from stone to stone  you get
across the first time in safety  if you have to cross again  you’ll
choose the same stones as before  you’ve proved them to be safe  any
other stones may be insecure and may bring you down  now that’s the
state of mind of the mass murderer when he goes in for his work  he
carries out his first crime by a novel method  he isn’t detected  so
when he tries his hand again he follows his first procedure slavishly
in all its mean details  these are the safe stepping stones for him 
look at the case of smith  how he repeated all the minutiæ of his
bath business time after time  deeming used to put down a fresh cement
floor in a room to cover the bodies of his victims  he did that more
than once  he’d found it safe the first time  you see  if you read up
burke and hare’s doings  you’ll find them a steady repetition of the
same method applied without variation  it’s the mark of the
mass murderer 

“so naturally  i expected the poisoned darts and the air gun to come
into play again  if ernest carried his work to a further stage  and i
made up my mind that i’d choose his next victim for him  he made two
deadly slips in that interview he had with us  wendover  perhaps you
noticed them?”

wendover shook his head 

“you told me after our talk with him that i ought to know who the
murderer was  but i didn’t guess it  what slips did he make?”

“the first slip was when he volunteered that he had a bicycle and had
used it to get down to the maze  once i had information that he owned
a bicycle  his alibi with the sore toe disappeared instanter from my
mind  his second slip was a worse one  he said to us that he hadn’t
been down to the maze since the murders  and then he let out that he
knew the position of the loophole through which roger shandon was
shot  speaking of his mythical assailant he said  ‘he was at the same
loophole as he’d used when he killed roger ’ if he’d never been near
the maze  how could he have known where that loophole was? perhaps you
think he might have picked up the information from those who were
there  but if he had  i doubt if he’d have phrased the thing as he
did  he seemed to me to pitch on that description of its position
simply because it was the easiest that came to hand—which meant that
it conveyed something definite to his own mind 

“that finished him  so far as i was concerned  but i took the trouble
to go down to the maze  just for my own satisfaction  i’d been there
that morning  and i’d noticed gossamer all over the hedge at the
loophole—some of it actually stretching across the hole in the hedge 
when i went down  after interviewing friend ernest  those gossamer
threads were still there  no gun could possibly have been shoved into
the hole without snapping them  i put my hand in  just to see  and of
course i got it covered with spider’s web ”

“so that was why you cleaned your hand on the hedge and made such a
fuss about spiders!” wendover exclaimed  “i thought you were simply
fooling——”

“i was certainly in high spirits ” sir clinton confessed blandly  “i
think i’d every right to be  i’d got complete confirmation of my
suspicion—though really i didn’t need the confirmatory evidence  let’s
get on with the story  we picked up friend ernest’s cigar case there 
and i kept it  i had a notion that he hadn’t left it there without
some ulterior purpose  and besides  i thought his finger prints might
come in useful some time  we didn’t need them  as it turned out  it
was merely a precaution on my part  you see  there was very little to
be done with finger prints on these air guns  it seems friend ernest
had carefully organised a grand air gun shooting competition on the
morning of the day he killed his brothers  he’d had the guns passed
from hand to hand  so that the finger marks of nearly everyone were
printed on them in addition to his own  of course  i had the tin box
containing the spurious darts  he’d handled that  but i hardly
troubled to examine it for finger marks  i was sure he’d use gloves in
touching it 

“then i found another thing which i half expected  i’d dropped the
hint about ariadne’s clue and the possibility of an outsider having to
resort to something of the kind  well  wendover and i found some yards
of black thread carefully placed where we couldn’t help seeing it  no
black thread was found when the shandons were murdered  but after i’d
dropped that hint in ernest shandon’s presence  behold! we get the
clue which is meant to suggest an outside murderer  wasn’t that
evidence  on the whole  quite enough to raise some suspicions about
him?

“wendover  i may tell you  thought i treated our friend ernest rather
brutally in our interview after the mythical attack on him  i
certainly told wendover afterwards that i thought ernest had had a bad
half hour  what i meant  squire  was the bad half hour he had when he
was laying off his tale to us and wasn’t sure what i thought about it 
that was a stiff time for him  as a matter of fact  i took no pains to
conceal from friend ernest that i thought his yarn was a mere pack of
lies  i wanted him to feel afraid of me  afraid of what i was getting
at in the whistlefield case  then  i felt sure  he’d have a shy at
knocking me out before i became really dangerous 

“to help on that good work  i arranged to play bridge one night at
whistlefield  so as to let him operate on his own ground  in case of
accidents  i had arranged that ardsley should come over and take
charge of the casualty  i’d taken most things into account—i had
to—and in case friend ernest hit anyone else in his flurry  i arranged
with ardsley that the injured person was to ‘die’ nominally  so that
friend ernest might be convinced of the efficacy of the faked darts
i’d put into his hands  and might go on to further crimes 

“i needn’t go into that affair  i’m not proud of it  i never intended
to risk miss hawkhurst in that way  of course  i knew at once she
hadn’t been poisoned with curare  but though i’d done my best to
sterilise the faked darts  i was afraid of blood poisoning setting in 
i spent a bad time over it  i can tell you  one can never be sure in a
case like that 

“well  there we were  he’d managed to nip back into the winter garden
before wendover got after him  he believed miss hawkhurst was dead and
only arthur’s life stood between him and the whole of the
shandon hawkhurst money  by this time  like all successful
mass murderers  he’d begun to feel a complete contempt for the risk of
detection  see burke and hare 

“so young hawkhurst was marked down  and this time  friend ernest
meant to have a perfect alibi  he must have guessed that i suspected
his other one  and he’d made up his mind to avert even a shadow of
suspicion  he’d stay under my eye at the very time that murder was
being done in the maze  nearly a mile away  that was a master stroke 
i admit 

“he used his cigar case to bait the trap—got arthur’s back up very
skilfully on the point of cowardice  and beforehand he’d set a
booby trap  he’d fixed the air gun in position to shoot at the right
level  and he’d arranged a thread to the trigger  when young hawkhurst
came to the entrance to the maze he stepped against the thread
stretched across the opening  the gun went off  and the dart hit him
near the heart  so simple! and then ernest came down with us  stumbled
‘accidentally’ over the air gun  tore away the thread from the trigger
before handing the gun to us  and then he ‘found’ ariadne’s clue for
us—the thread he’d laid down as a blind  to make us think it was a
stranger at work  someone operating from the river ”

“he was cleverer than i gave him credit for ” stenness confessed 
rather grudgingly  “i always thought him a dull brute ”

“the contents of roger shandon’s will took away my last doubts ” sir
clinton went on  “besides that  i’d tested the dart he’d used against
miss hawkhurst and found it was one of the faked lot stolen from the
museum that night  so by then the only question was  ‘what should be
done with friend ernest?’”

sir clinton paused and lit a fresh cigar before going on to the end of
his narrative  when he spoke once more his audience was rather
surprised by this theme 

“there’s always a good deal of talk in the newspapers from time to
time about ‘unexplained mysteries ’ ‘unsolved crimes ’ ‘police
inefficiency ’ and so forth  now i’ll put a case to you  suppose you
were a detective engaged on some beastly case like the jack the ripper
business  and suppose you discovered in the end that the criminal was
a lunatic—as jack the ripper obviously was  and  finally  suppose that
his insanity has been discovered and that he’s been put into an asylum
since his latest crime  what would you do? would you publish your
results? even if he weren’t already in an asylum  what could you do?
try him  and get him sent to broadmoor? for you couldn’t hang him 
since he’s insane  would you do that? if you did  the net result would
be that you’d spatter all his innocent relations with the mud of his
crime  and you’d do no good at all  there are some sleeping dogs that
are best left lying  mind  i’m giving you merely my own private view 
i don’t mean that you can take that to represent police procedure  i’m
simply telling you how i feel about the business ”

ardsley nodded in agreement 

“so long as a brute gets his deserts  it doesn’t seem to me to matter
how he gets them  and i agree with you about making an innocent family
suffer through no fault of their own ”

sir clinton acknowledged ardsley’s support 

“that’s how i looked at the shandon case ” he said  “i could have
arrested the brute  then we’d have had a trial  and the hawkhursts
would have been branded as relatives of a murderer  i thought things
could be done just as efficiently by making ernest shandon his own
executioner  in fact  my method was a stiffer one than mere hanging 
as you know  and if it failed—well  the law would take its normal
course 

“i’d found a suit case packed ready in the maze on the night that
young hawkhurst was attacked  i expected something of the sort and
went specially to look for it  i’d a notion that he wouldn’t care to
sneak out of the house with a suit case in his hand at the last
moment  if he bolted  he’d have it cached somewhere  so that he could
leave with empty hands  quite unsuspicious  you know  i knew he’d need
a complete change of clothes so as to be able to alter his appearance
and put the hue and cry off his track  he’d shown a penchant for the
maze all along  he’d even dragged it into his story of the attack on
himself  so it was clear he had it very much in mind  i banked on that
when i looked there for his suit case  it was a good enough choice  he
could sneak out of the house  pick up the suit case  go across to the
boat house  and row himself down to the village without having to be
seen carrying the bag on the public road at all—quite a good plan  if
you ask me ”

“i hadn’t seen why he went to the maze  i admit ” said stenness  “it
seemed rather like a bit of magic on your part to have foreseen that ”

“once i’d found the suit case ” sir clinton went on  “all that
remained was to arrange the moment for his bolt  so that i could grip
him  there was no use waiting on his good pleasure to fix the time  i
gave him a plain hint that i’d be glad to see him go—let him think i
wanted to avoid the scandal of a trial  there was no lying in that  i
certainly did want to avoid putting him in the dock 

“now as it happened  stenness had been realising some capital at that
time  so i got him to put his cash into the study safe that night  and
i told friend ernest that the money was there—a good round sum  that
gave him the sinews of war for his bolt  free of charge  you see? he’d
only to grab it in passing  and as soon as i felt he was nibbling  i
telephoned a code message to the police station  some rot about navy
cut tobacco  from that prearranged message  they knew they’d only to
open an envelope and carry out their sealed orders which i’d left with
them  they came up to the maze during the night  watched ernest into
it about 6 a m —i’d been keeping an eye on his room during the night 
so he couldn’t have given us the slip anyhow  then  as soon as he went
into the maze my men closed the gates behind him—and the game was up!

“you know the rest  we had to hold an inquest  of course  but you must
have seen that we gave the bare legal minimum of evidence  just enough
to prove suicide  of course there’s sure to be some talk  one can’t
help that  but we’ve stifled it as far as we possibly could  and the
reporters got so little that the thing was hardly talked about in the
papers ”

sir clinton smiled with a tingle of sardonic amusement 

“i wonder what they’d have made of it if they’d known all about our
methods! perhaps i wasn’t quite orthodox  perhaps i ought to have got
him nicely hanged—and incidentally run the public in for a big bill
for his prosecution  i can only say that my conscience is quite clear 
it doesn’t give me a twinge  consciences are weird things ”

he glanced across at stenness with a glint of humour in his eye which
the rest failed to see 

“and now  what about some bridge?”


                               the end



transcriber’s notes

this transcription follows the text of the 1927 edition  as reprinted
by penguin books  with the exception of the chapter names  which were
omitted in that edition  the ebook reprint by orion house was
consulted to restore the original chapter names 

the following alterations have been made to correct what are believed
to be unambiguous errors in the penguin books edition 

    “two  laces at once” to “two places at once” (chapter iv)
    “may seen strange” to “may seem strange” (chapter vii)
    “a tract almost grazing” to “a track almost grazing” (chapter x)
    “dissapeared” to “disappeared” (chapter xi)
    “in easy visions” to “in uneasy visions” (chapter xiii)
    “arthur shandon” to “arthur hawkhurst” (chapter xiii)
    “your afraid” to “you’re afraid” (chapter xiii)
    “polished then” to “polished them” (chapter xvi)
    “slighty” to “slightly” (chapter xvi)
    “fron” to “from” (chapter xvi  three occurrences)
    “as he did do” to “as he did so” (chapter xvii)
    “didn’t you makes” to “didn’t you make” (chapter xviii)

additionally  several occurrences of unpaired quotation marks have
been corrected  lastly  in chapter iv a single line of dialogue (“can
you guess what poison was used?”) was erroneously omitted  it has been
reinstated here (obtained by consulting the orion house ebook) 

other errors  if any  in the penguin books edition have been left
as printed 



        
                end of the project gutenberg ebook murder in the maze    
        

    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed 


creating the works from print editions not protected by u s  copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties  special rules  set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license  apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark  project gutenberg is a registered trademark 
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook  except by following
the terms of the trademark license  including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark  if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook  complying with the trademark license is very
easy  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works  reports  performances and research  project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u s  copyright law  redistribution is subject to the trademark
license  especially commercial redistribution 


start  full license
the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work


to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works  by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”)  you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www gutenberg org/license 


section 1  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™ electronic works


1 a  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work  you indicate that you have read  understand  agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement  you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession  if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement  you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1 e 8 


1 b  “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement  see
paragraph 1 c below  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works  see paragraph 1 e below 


1 c  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf)  owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works  nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states  if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states  we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying  distributing  performing 
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed  of course  we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work  you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others 



1 d  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work  copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change  if you are outside the united states 
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading  copying  displaying  performing 
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work  the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states 


1 e  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg 


1 e 1  the following sentence  with active links to  or other
immediate access to  the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears  or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed  displayed 
performed  viewed  copied or distributed 


  
    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever  you may copy it  give it away or re use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www gutenberg org  if you
    are not located in the united states  you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook 
  


1 e 2  if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u s  copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder)  the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges  if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work  you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 


1 e 3  if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder  your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder  additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work 


1 e 4  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work  or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™ 


1 e 5  do not copy  display  perform  distribute or redistribute this
electronic work  or any part of this electronic work  without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1 e 1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license 


1 e 6  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary 
compressed  marked up  nonproprietary or proprietary form  including
any word processing or hypertext form  however  if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www gutenberg org)  you must  at no additional cost  fee or expense
to the user  provide a copy  a means of exporting a copy  or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request  of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form  any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1 e 1 


1 e 7  do not charge a fee for access to  viewing  displaying 
performing  copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 


1 e 8  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that 


    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes  the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark  but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation  royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns  royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4  “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation ”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license  you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works 
    
    • you provide  in accordance with paragraph 1 f 3  a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy  if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work 
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works 
    


1 e 9  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement  you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation  the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark  contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below 


1 f 


1 f 1  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify  do copyright research on  transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u s  copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection  despite these efforts  project gutenberg™
electronic works  and the medium on which they may be stored  may
contain “defects ” such as  but not limited to  incomplete  inaccurate
or corrupt data  transcription errors  a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement  a defective or damaged disk or
other medium  a computer virus  or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment 


1 f 2  limited warranty  disclaimer of damages   except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1 f 3  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation  the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark  and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement  disclaim all
liability to you for damages  costs and expenses  including legal
fees  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence  strict
liability  breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1 f 3  you agree that the foundation  the
trademark owner  and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual  direct  indirect  consequential  punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage 


1 f 3  limited right of replacement or refund   if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it  you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from  if you
received the work on a physical medium  you must return the medium
with your written explanation  the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund  if you received the work electronically  the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund  if
the second copy is also defective  you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem 


1 f 4  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1 f 3  this work is provided to you ‘as is’  with no
other warranties of any kind  express or implied  including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose 


1 f 5  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages  if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement  the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law  the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions 


1 f 6  indemnity   you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation  the
trademark owner  any agent or employee of the foundation  anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement  and any volunteers associated with the
production  promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works  harmless from all liability  costs and expenses 
including legal fees  that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur  (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work  (b) alteration  modification  or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work  and (c) any
defect you cause 


section 2  information about the mission of project gutenberg™


project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete  old  middle aged and new computers  it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life 


volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come  in 2001  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations  to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help  see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www gutenberg org 


section 3  information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation


the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service  the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64 6221541  contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u s  federal laws and your state’s laws 


the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west 
salt lake city  ut 84116  (801) 596 1887  email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www gutenberg org/contact


section 4  information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation


project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment  many small donations
($1 to $5 000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs 


the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort  much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance  to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www gutenberg org/donate 


while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements  we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate 


international donations are gratefully accepted  but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states  u s  laws alone swamp our small staff 


please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks  online payments and credit card donations  to
donate  please visit  www gutenberg org/donate 


section 5  general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works


professor michael s  hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone  for forty years  he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support 


project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions  all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u s  unless a copyright notice is included  thus  we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition 


most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility  www gutenberg org 


this website includes information about project gutenberg™ 
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation  how to help produce our new ebooks  and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks 


