
    the project gutenberg ebook of the prince
    
this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and 
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever  you may copy it  give it away or re use it under the terms 
of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online 
at www gutenberg org  if you are not located in the united states  
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located 
before using this ebook 



    
        title  the prince
        
        author  niccolò machiavelli
        translator  w  k  marriott

        
        release date  february 11  2006  ebook #1232 most recently updated  july 1  2022
        language  english
        
        
    
        
                start of the project gutenberg ebook the prince    
        



the prince

by nicolo machiavelli

translated by w  k  marriott


contents

 introduction
 youth æt  1 25—1469 94
 office æt  25 43—1494 1512
 literature and death æt  43 58—1512 27
 the man and his works
 dedication

 the prince
 chapter i  how many kinds of principalities there are  and by what means they are acquired
 chapter ii  concerning hereditary principalities
 chapter iii  concerning mixed principalities
 chapter iv  why the kingdom of darius  conquered by alexander  did not rebel against the successors of alexander at his death
 chapter v  concerning the way to govern cities or principalities which lived under their own laws before they were annexed
 chapter vi  concerning new principalities which are acquired by one’s own arms and ability
 chapter vii  concerning new principalities which are acquired either by the arms of others or by good fortune
 chapter viii  concerning those who have obtained a principality by wickedness
 chapter ix  concerning a civil principality
 chapter x  concerning the way in which the strength of all principalities ought to be measured
 chapter xi  concerning ecclesiastical principalities
 chapter xii  how many kinds of soldiery there are and concerning mercenaries
 chapter xiii  concerning auxiliaries  mixed soldiery  and one’s own
 chapter xiv  that which concerns a prince on the subject of war
 chapter xv  concerning things for which men  and especially princes  are praised or blamed
 chapter xvi  concerning liberality and meanness
 chapter xvii  concerning cruelty and clemency  and whether it is better to be loved than feared
 chapter xviii  concerning the way in which princes should keep faith
 chapter xix  that one should avoid being despised and hated
 chapter xx  are fortresses  and many other things to which princes often resort  advantageous or hurtful?
 chapter xxi  how a prince should conduct himself so as to gain renown
 chapter xxii  concerning the secretaries of princes
 chapter xxiii  how flatterers should be avoided
 chapter xxiv  why the princes of italy have lost their states
 chapter xxv  what fortune can effect in human affairs and how to withstand her
 chapter xxvi  an exhortation to liberate italy from the barbarians

 description of the methods adopted by the duke valentino when murdering vitellozzo vitelli  oliverotto da fermo  the signor pagolo  and the duke di gravina orsini

 the life of castruccio castracani of lucca




  nicolo machiavelli  born at florence on 3rd may 1469  from 1494 to
1512 held an official post at florence which included diplomatic
missions to various european courts  imprisoned in florence  1512 
later exiled and returned to san casciano  died at florence on 22nd
june 1527  




introduction


nicolo machiavelli was born at florence on 3rd may 1469  he was the
second son of bernardo di nicolo machiavelli  a lawyer of some repute 
and of bartolommea di stefano nelli  his wife  both parents were
members of the old florentine nobility 

his life falls naturally into three periods  each of which singularly
enough constitutes a distinct and important era in the history of
florence  his youth was concurrent with the greatness of florence as an
italian power under the guidance of lorenzo de’ medici  il magnifico 
the downfall of the medici in florence occurred in 1494  in which year
machiavelli entered the public service  during his official career
florence was free under the government of a republic  which lasted
until 1512  when the medici returned to power  and machiavelli lost his
office  the medici again ruled florence from 1512 until 1527  when they
were once more driven out  this was the period of machiavelli’s
literary activity and increasing influence  but he died  within a few
weeks of the expulsion of the medici  on 22nd june 1527  in his
fifty eighth year  without having regained office 




youth — æt  1 25—1469 94


although there is little recorded of the youth of machiavelli  the
florence of those days is so well known that the early environment of
this representative citizen may be easily imagined  florence has been
described as a city with two opposite currents of life  one directed by
the fervent and austere savonarola  the other by the splendour loving
lorenzo  savonarola’s influence upon the young machiavelli must have
been slight  for although at one time he wielded immense power over the
fortunes of florence  he only furnished machiavelli with a subject of a
gibe in  the prince   where he is cited as an example of an unarmed
prophet who came to a bad end  whereas the magnificence of the medicean
rule during the life of lorenzo appeared to have impressed machiavelli
strongly  for he frequently recurs to it in his writings  and it is to
lorenzo’s grandson that he dedicates  the prince  

machiavelli  in his “history of florence ” gives us a picture of the
young men among whom his youth was passed  he writes  “they were freer
than their forefathers in dress and living  and spent more in other
kinds of excesses  consuming their time and money in idleness  gaming 
and women  their chief aim was to appear well dressed and to speak with
wit and acuteness  whilst he who could wound others the most cleverly
was thought the wisest ” in a letter to his son guido  machiavelli
shows why youth should avail itself of its opportunities for study  and
leads us to infer that his own youth had been so occupied  he writes 
“i have received your letter  which has given me the greatest pleasure 
especially because you tell me you are quite restored in health  than
which i could have no better news  for if god grant life to you  and to
me  i hope to make a good man of you if you are willing to do your
share ” then  writing of a new patron  he continues  “this will turn
out well for you  but it is necessary for you to study  since  then 
you have no longer the excuse of illness  take pains to study letters
and music  for you see what honour is done to me for the little skill i
have  therefore  my son  if you wish to please me  and to bring success
and honour to yourself  do right and study  because others will help
you if you help yourself ”




office — æt  25 43—1494 1512


the second period of machiavelli’s life was spent in the service of the
free republic of florence  which flourished  as stated above  from the
expulsion of the medici in 1494 until their return in 1512  after
serving four years in one of the public offices he was appointed
chancellor and secretary to the second chancery  the ten of liberty and
peace  here we are on firm ground when dealing with the events of
machiavelli’s life  for during this time he took a leading part in the
affairs of the republic  and we have its decrees  records  and
dispatches to guide us  as well as his own writings  a mere
recapitulation of a few of his transactions with the statesmen and
soldiers of his time gives a fair indication of his activities  and
supplies the sources from which he drew the experiences and characters
which illustrate  the prince  

his first mission was in 1499 to catherina sforza  “my lady of forli”
of  the prince   from whose conduct and fate he drew the moral that it
is far better to earn the confidence of the people than to rely on
fortresses  this is a very noticeable principle in machiavelli  and is
urged by him in many ways as a matter of vital importance to princes 

in 1500 he was sent to france to obtain terms from louis xii for
continuing the war against pisa  this king it was who  in his conduct
of affairs in italy  committed the five capital errors in statecraft
summarized in  the prince   and was consequently driven out  he  also 
it was who made the dissolution of his marriage a condition of support
to pope alexander vi  which leads machiavelli to refer those who urge
that such promises should be kept to what he has written concerning the
faith of princes 

machiavelli’s public life was largely occupied with events arising out
of the ambitions of pope alexander vi and his son  cesare borgia  the
duke valentino  and these characters fill a large space of  the
prince   machiavelli never hesitates to cite the actions of the duke
for the benefit of usurpers who wish to keep the states they have
seized  he can  indeed  find no precepts to offer so good as the
pattern of cesare borgia’s conduct  insomuch that cesare is acclaimed
by some critics as the “hero” of  the prince   yet in  the prince  the
duke is in point of fact cited as a type of the man who rises on the
fortune of others  and falls with them  who takes every course that
might be expected from a prudent man but the course which will save
him  who is prepared for all eventualities but the one which happens 
and who  when all his abilities fail to carry him through  exclaims
that it was not his fault  but an extraordinary and unforeseen
fatality 

on the death of pius iii  in 1503  machiavelli was sent to rome to
watch the election of his successor  and there he saw cesare borgia
cheated into allowing the choice of the college to fall on giuliano
delle rovere (julius ii)  who was one of the cardinals that had most
reason to fear the duke  machiavelli  when commenting on this election 
says that he who thinks new favours will cause great personages to
forget old injuries deceives himself  julius did not rest until he had
ruined cesare 

it was to julius ii that machiavelli was sent in 1506  when that
pontiff was commencing his enterprise against bologna  which he brought
to a successful issue  as he did many of his other adventures  owing
chiefly to his impetuous character  it is in reference to pope julius
that machiavelli moralizes on the resemblance between fortune and
women  and concludes that it is the bold rather than the cautious man
that will win and hold them both 

it is impossible to follow here the varying fortunes of the italian
states  which in 1507 were controlled by france  spain  and germany 
with results that have lasted to our day  we are concerned with those
events  and with the three great actors in them  so far only as they
impinge on the personality of machiavelli  he had several meetings with
louis xii of france  and his estimate of that monarch’s character has
already been alluded to  machiavelli has painted ferdinand of aragon as
the man who accomplished great things under the cloak of religion  but
who in reality had no mercy  faith  humanity  or integrity  and who 
had he allowed himself to be influenced by such motives  would have
been ruined  the emperor maximilian was one of the most interesting men
of the age  and his character has been drawn by many hands  but
machiavelli  who was an envoy at his court in 1507 8  reveals the
secret of his many failures when he describes him as a secretive man 
without force of character—ignoring the human agencies necessary to
carry his schemes into effect  and never insisting on the fulfilment of
his wishes 

the remaining years of machiavelli’s official career were filled with
events arising out of the league of cambrai  made in 1508 between the
three great european powers already mentioned and the pope  with the
object of crushing the venetian republic  this result was attained in
the battle of vaila  when venice lost in one day all that she had won
in eight hundred years  florence had a difficult part to play during
these events  complicated as they were by the feud which broke out
between the pope and the french  because friendship with france had
dictated the entire policy of the republic  when  in 1511  julius ii
finally formed the holy league against france  and with the assistance
of the swiss drove the french out of italy  florence lay at the mercy
of the pope  and had to submit to his terms  one of which was that the
medici should be restored  the return of the medici to florence on 1st
september 1512  and the consequent fall of the republic  was the signal
for the dismissal of machiavelli and his friends  and thus put an end
to his public career  for  as we have seen  he died without regaining
office 




literature and death — æt  43 58—1512 27


on the return of the medici  machiavelli  who for a few weeks had
vainly hoped to retain his office under the new masters of florence 
was dismissed by decree dated 7th november 1512  shortly after this he
was accused of complicity in an abortive conspiracy against the medici 
imprisoned  and put to the question by torture  the new medicean pope 
leo x  procured his release  and he retired to his small property at
san casciano  near florence  where he devoted himself to literature  in
a letter to francesco vettori  dated 13th december 1513  he has left a
very interesting description of his life at this period  which
elucidates his methods and his motives in writing  the prince   after
describing his daily occupations with his family and neighbours  he
writes  “the evening being come  i return home and go to my study  at
the entrance i pull off my peasant clothes  covered with dust and dirt 
and put on my noble court dress  and thus becomingly re clothed i pass
into the ancient courts of the men of old  where  being lovingly
received by them  i am fed with that food which is mine alone  where i
do not hesitate to speak with them  and to ask for the reason of their
actions  and they in their benignity answer me  and for four hours i
feel no weariness  i forget every trouble  poverty does not dismay 
death does not terrify me  i am possessed entirely by those great men 
and because dante says 

knowledge doth come of learning well retained 
unfruitful else 

i have noted down what i have gained from their conversation  and have
composed a small work on ‘principalities ’ where i pour myself out as
fully as i can in meditation on the subject  discussing what a
principality is  what kinds there are  how they can be acquired  how
they can be kept  why they are lost  and if any of my fancies ever
pleased you  this ought not to displease you  and to a prince 
especially to a new one  it should be welcome  therefore i dedicate it
to his magnificence giuliano  filippo casavecchio has seen it  he will
be able to tell you what is in it  and of the discourses i have had
with him  nevertheless  i am still enriching and polishing it ”

the “little book” suffered many vicissitudes before attaining the form
in which it has reached us  various mental influences were at work
during its composition  its title and patron were changed  and for some
unknown reason it was finally dedicated to lorenzo de’ medici  although
machiavelli discussed with casavecchio whether it should be sent or
presented in person to the patron  there is no evidence that lorenzo
ever received or even read it  he certainly never gave machiavelli any
employment  although it was plagiarized during machiavelli’s lifetime 
 the prince  was never published by him  and its text is still
disputable 

machiavelli concludes his letter to vettori thus  “and as to this
little thing  his book   when it has been read it will be seen that
during the fifteen years i have given to the study of statecraft i have
neither slept nor idled  and men ought ever to desire to be served by
one who has reaped experience at the expense of others  and of my
loyalty none could doubt  because having always kept faith i could not
now learn how to break it  for he who has been faithful and honest  as
i have  cannot change his nature  and my poverty is a witness to my
honesty ”

before machiavelli had got  the prince  off his hands he commenced his
“discourse on the first decade of titus livius ” which should be read
concurrently with  the prince   these and several minor works occupied
him until the year 1518  when he accepted a small commission to look
after the affairs of some florentine merchants at genoa  in 1519 the
medicean rulers of florence granted a few political concessions to her
citizens  and machiavelli with others was consulted upon a new
constitution under which the great council was to be restored  but on
one pretext or another it was not promulgated 

in 1520 the florentine merchants again had recourse to machiavelli to
settle their difficulties with lucca  but this year was chiefly
remarkable for his re entry into florentine literary society  where he
was much sought after  and also for the production of his “art of war ”
it was in the same year that he received a commission at the instance
of cardinal de’ medici to write the “history of florence ” a task which
occupied him until 1525  his return to popular favour may have
determined the medici to give him this employment  for an old writer
observes that “an able statesman out of work  like a huge whale  will
endeavour to overturn the ship unless he has an empty cask to play
with ”

when the “history of florence” was finished  machiavelli took it to
rome for presentation to his patron  giuliano de’ medici  who had in
the meanwhile become pope under the title of clement vii  it is
somewhat remarkable that  as  in 1513  machiavelli had written  the
prince  for the instruction of the medici after they had just regained
power in florence  so  in 1525  he dedicated the “history of florence”
to the head of the family when its ruin was now at hand  in that year
the battle of pavia destroyed the french rule in italy  and left
francis i a prisoner in the hands of his great rival  charles v  this
was followed by the sack of rome  upon the news of which the popular
party at florence threw off the yoke of the medici  who were once more
banished 

machiavelli was absent from florence at this time  but hastened his
return  hoping to secure his former office of secretary to the “ten of
liberty and peace ” unhappily he was taken ill soon after he reached
florence  where he died on 22nd june 1527 




the man and his works


no one can say where the bones of machiavelli rest  but modern florence
has decreed him a stately cenotaph in santa croce  by the side of her
most famous sons  recognizing that  whatever other nations may have
found in his works  italy found in them the idea of her unity and the
germs of her renaissance among the nations of europe  whilst it is idle
to protest against the world wide and evil signification of his name 
it may be pointed out that the harsh construction of his doctrine which
this sinister reputation implies was unknown to his own day  and that
the researches of recent times have enabled us to interpret him more
reasonably  it is due to these inquiries that the shape of an “unholy
necromancer ” which so long haunted men’s vision  has begun to fade 

machiavelli was undoubtedly a man of great observation  acuteness  and
industry  noting with appreciative eye whatever passed before him  and
with his supreme literary gift turning it to account in his enforced
retirement from affairs  he does not present himself  nor is he
depicted by his contemporaries  as a type of that rare combination  the
successful statesman and author  for he appears to have been only
moderately prosperous in his several embassies and political
employments  he was misled by catherina sforza  ignored by louis xii 
overawed by cesare borgia  several of his embassies were quite barren
of results  his attempts to fortify florence failed  and the soldiery
that he raised astonished everybody by their cowardice  in the conduct
of his own affairs he was timid and time serving  he dared not appear
by the side of soderini  to whom he owed so much  for fear of
compromising himself  his connection with the medici was open to
suspicion  and giuliano appears to have recognized his real forte when
he set him to write the “history of florence ” rather than employ him
in the state  and it is on the literary side of his character  and
there alone  that we find no weakness and no failure 

although the light of almost four centuries has been focused on  the
prince   its problems are still debatable and interesting  because they
are the eternal problems between the ruled and their rulers  such as
they are  its ethics are those of machiavelli’s contemporaries  yet
they cannot be said to be out of date so long as the governments of
europe rely on material rather than on moral forces  its historical
incidents and personages become interesting by reason of the uses which
machiavelli makes of them to illustrate his theories of government and
conduct 

leaving out of consideration those maxims of state which still furnish
some european and eastern statesmen with principles of action   the
prince  is bestrewn with truths that can be proved at every turn  men
are still the dupes of their simplicity and greed  as they were in the
days of alexander vi  the cloak of religion still conceals the vices
which machiavelli laid bare in the character of ferdinand of aragon 
men will not look at things as they really are  but as they wish them
to be—and are ruined  in politics there are no perfectly safe courses 
prudence consists in choosing the least dangerous ones  then—to pass to
a higher plane—machiavelli reiterates that  although crimes may win an
empire  they do not win glory  necessary wars are just wars  and the
arms of a nation are hallowed when it has no other resource but to
fight 

it is the cry of a far later day than machiavelli’s that government
should be elevated into a living moral force  capable of inspiring the
people with a just recognition of the fundamental principles of
society  to this “high argument”  the prince  contributes but little 
machiavelli always refused to write either of men or of governments
otherwise than as he found them  and he writes with such skill and
insight that his work is of abiding value  but what invests  the
prince  with more than a merely artistic or historical interest is the
incontrovertible truth that it deals with the great principles which
still guide nations and rulers in their relationship with each other
and their neighbours 

in translating  the prince  my aim has been to achieve at all costs an
exact literal rendering of the original  rather than a fluent
paraphrase adapted to the modern notions of style and expression 
machiavelli was no facile phrasemonger  the conditions under which he
wrote obliged him to weigh every word  his themes were lofty  his
substance grave  his manner nobly plain and serious   quis eo fuit
unquam in partiundis rebus  in definiendis  in explanandis pressior? 
in  the prince   it may be truly said  there is reason assignable  not
only for every word  but for the position of every word  to an
englishman of shakespeare’s time the translation of such a treatise was
in some ways a comparatively easy task  for in those times the genius
of the english more nearly resembled that of the italian language  to
the englishman of to day it is not so simple  to take a single example 
the word  intrattenere   employed by machiavelli to indicate the policy
adopted by the roman senate towards the weaker states of greece  would
by an elizabethan be correctly rendered “entertain ” and every
contemporary reader would understand what was meant by saying that
“rome  entertained  the ætolians and the achaeans without augmenting
their power ” but to day such a phrase would seem obsolete and
ambiguous  if not unmeaning  we are compelled to say that “ rome
maintained friendly relations with the ætolians  ” etc   using four
words to do the work of one  i have tried to preserve the pithy brevity
of the italian so far as was consistent with an absolute fidelity to
the sense  if the result be an occasional asperity i can only hope that
the reader  in his eagerness to reach the author’s meaning  may
overlook the roughness of the road that leads him to it 

the following is a list of the works of machiavelli 

principal works  discorso sopra le cose di pisa  1499  del modo di
trattare i popoli della valdichiana ribellati  1502  del modo tenuto
dal duca valentino nell’ ammazzare vitellozzo vitelli  oliverotto da
fermo  etc   1502  discorso sopra la provisione del danaro  1502 
decennale primo (poem in terza rima)  1506  ritratti delle cose dell’
alemagna  1508 12  decennale secondo  1509  ritratti delle cose di
francia  1510  discorsi sopra la prima deca di t  livio  3 vols  
1512 17  il principe  1513  andria  comedy translated from terence 
1513 (?)  mandragola  prose comedy in five acts  with prologue in
verse  1513  della lingua (dialogue)  1514  clizia  comedy in prose 
1515 (?)  belfagor arcidiavolo (novel)  1515  asino d’oro (poem in
terza rima)  1517  dell’ arte della guerra  1519 20  discorso sopra il
riformare lo stato di firenze  1520  sommario delle cose della citta di
lucca  1520  vita di castruccio castracani da lucca  1520  istorie
fiorentine  8 books  1521 5  frammenti storici  1525 

other poems include sonetti  canzoni  ottave  and canti
carnascialeschi 

editions  aldo  venice  1546  della tertina  1550  cambiagi  florence 
6 vols   1782 5  dei classici  milan  10 1813  silvestri  9 vols  
1820 2  passerini  fanfani  milanesi  6 vols  only published  1873 7 

minor works  ed  f  l  polidori  1852  lettere familiari  ed  e 
alvisi  1883  2 editions  one with excisions  credited writings  ed  g 
canestrini  1857  letters to f  vettori  see a  ridolfi  pensieri
intorno allo scopo di n  machiavelli nel libro il principe  etc   d 
ferrara  the private correspondence of nicolo machiavelli  1929 




dedication


to the magnificent lorenzo di piero de’ medici

those who strive to obtain the good graces of a prince are accustomed
to come before him with such things as they hold most precious  or in
which they see him take most delight  whence one often sees horses 
arms  cloth of gold  precious stones  and similar ornaments presented
to princes  worthy of their greatness 

desiring therefore to present myself to your magnificence with some
testimony of my devotion towards you  i have not found among my
possessions anything which i hold more dear than  or value so much as 
the knowledge of the actions of great men  acquired by long experience
in contemporary affairs  and a continual study of antiquity  which 
having reflected upon it with great and prolonged diligence  i now
send  digested into a little volume  to your magnificence 

and although i may consider this work unworthy of your countenance 
nevertheless i trust much to your benignity that it may be acceptable 
seeing that it is not possible for me to make a better gift than to
offer you the opportunity of understanding in the shortest time all
that i have learnt in so many years  and with so many troubles and
dangers  which work i have not embellished with swelling or magnificent
words  nor stuffed with rounded periods  nor with any extrinsic
allurements or adornments whatever  with which so many are accustomed
to embellish their works  for i have wished either that no honour
should be given it  or else that the truth of the matter and the
weightiness of the theme shall make it acceptable 

nor do i hold with those who regard it as a presumption if a man of low
and humble condition dare to discuss and settle the concerns of
princes  because  just as those who draw landscapes place themselves
below in the plain to contemplate the nature of the mountains and of
lofty places  and in order to contemplate the plains place themselves
upon high mountains  even so to understand the nature of the people it
needs to be a prince  and to understand that of princes it needs to be
of the people 

take then  your magnificence  this little gift in the spirit in which i
send it  wherein  if it be diligently read and considered by you  you
will learn my extreme desire that you should attain that greatness
which fortune and your other attributes promise  and if your
magnificence from the summit of your greatness will sometimes turn your
eyes to these lower regions  you will see how unmeritedly i suffer a
great and continued malignity of fortune 




the prince




chapter i 
how many kinds of principalities there are  and by what means they are
acquired


all states  all powers  that have held and hold rule over men have been
and are either republics or principalities 

principalities are either hereditary  in which the family has been long
established  or they are new 

the new are either entirely new  as was milan to francesco sforza  or
they are  as it were  members annexed to the hereditary state of the
prince who has acquired them  as was the kingdom of naples to that of
the king of spain 

such dominions thus acquired are either accustomed to live under a
prince  or to live in freedom  and are acquired either by the arms of
the prince himself  or of others  or else by fortune or by ability 




chapter ii 
concerning hereditary principalities


i will leave out all discussion on republics  inasmuch as in another
place i have written of them at length  and will address myself only to
principalities  in doing so i will keep to the order indicated above 
and discuss how such principalities are to be ruled and preserved 

i say at once there are fewer difficulties in holding hereditary
states  and those long accustomed to the family of their prince  than
new ones  for it is sufficient only not to transgress the customs of
his ancestors  and to deal prudently with circumstances as they arise 
for a prince of average powers to maintain himself in his state  unless
he be deprived of it by some extraordinary and excessive force  and if
he should be so deprived of it  whenever anything sinister happens to
the usurper  he will regain it 

we have in italy  for example  the duke of ferrara  who could not have
withstood the attacks of the venetians in ’84  nor those of pope julius
in ’10  unless he had been long established in his dominions  for the
hereditary prince has less cause and less necessity to offend  hence it
happens that he will be more loved  and unless extraordinary vices
cause him to be hated  it is reasonable to expect that his subjects
will be naturally well disposed towards him  and in the antiquity and
duration of his rule the memories and motives that make for change are
lost  for one change always leaves the toothing for another 




chapter iii 
concerning mixed principalities


but the difficulties occur in a new principality  and firstly  if it be
not entirely new  but is  as it were  a member of a state which  taken
collectively  may be called composite  the changes arise chiefly from
an inherent difficulty which there is in all new principalities  for
men change their rulers willingly  hoping to better themselves  and
this hope induces them to take up arms against him who rules  wherein
they are deceived  because they afterwards find by experience they have
gone from bad to worse  this follows also on another natural and common
necessity  which always causes a new prince to burden those who have
submitted to him with his soldiery and with infinite other hardships
which he must put upon his new acquisition 

in this way you have enemies in all those whom you have injured in
seizing that principality  and you are not able to keep those friends
who put you there because of your not being able to satisfy them in the
way they expected  and you cannot take strong measures against them 
feeling bound to them  for  although one may be very strong in armed
forces  yet in entering a province one has always need of the goodwill
of the natives 

for these reasons louis the twelfth  king of france  quickly occupied
milan  and as quickly lost it  and to turn him out the first time it
only needed lodovico’s own forces  because those who had opened the
gates to him  finding themselves deceived in their hopes of future
benefit  would not endure the ill treatment of the new prince  it is
very true that  after acquiring rebellious provinces a second time 
they are not so lightly lost afterwards  because the prince  with
little reluctance  takes the opportunity of the rebellion to punish the
delinquents  to clear out the suspects  and to strengthen himself in
the weakest places  thus to cause france to lose milan the first time
it was enough for the duke lodovico 1  to raise insurrections on the
borders  but to cause him to lose it a second time it was necessary to
bring the whole world against him  and that his armies should be
defeated and driven out of italy  which followed from the causes above
mentioned 

  1  duke lodovico was lodovico moro  a son of francesco sforza  who
 married beatrice d’este  he ruled over milan from 1494 to 1500  and
 died in 1510 

nevertheless milan was taken from france both the first and the second
time  the general reasons for the first have been discussed  it remains
to name those for the second  and to see what resources he had  and
what any one in his situation would have had for maintaining himself
more securely in his acquisition than did the king of france 

now i say that those dominions which  when acquired  are added to an
ancient state by him who acquires them  are either of the same country
and language  or they are not  when they are  it is easier to hold
them  especially when they have not been accustomed to self government 
and to hold them securely it is enough to have destroyed the family of
the prince who was ruling them  because the two peoples  preserving in
other things the old conditions  and not being unlike in customs  will
live quietly together  as one has seen in brittany  burgundy  gascony 
and normandy  which have been bound to france for so long a time  and 
although there may be some difference in language  nevertheless the
customs are alike  and the people will easily be able to get on amongst
themselves  he who has annexed them  if he wishes to hold them  has
only to bear in mind two considerations  the one  that the family of
their former lord is extinguished  the other  that neither their laws
nor their taxes are altered  so that in a very short time they will
become entirely one body with the old principality 

but when states are acquired in a country differing in language 
customs  or laws  there are difficulties  and good fortune and great
energy are needed to hold them  and one of the greatest and most real
helps would be that he who has acquired them should go and reside
there  this would make his position more secure and durable  as it has
made that of the turk in greece  who  notwithstanding all the other
measures taken by him for holding that state  if he had not settled
there  would not have been able to keep it  because  if one is on the
spot  disorders are seen as they spring up  and one can quickly remedy
them  but if one is not at hand  they are heard of only when they are
great  and then one can no longer remedy them  besides this  the
country is not pillaged by your officials  the subjects are satisfied
by prompt recourse to the prince  thus  wishing to be good  they have
more cause to love him  and wishing to be otherwise  to fear him  he
who would attack that state from the outside must have the utmost
caution  as long as the prince resides there it can only be wrested
from him with the greatest difficulty 

the other and better course is to send colonies to one or two places 
which may be as keys to that state  for it is necessary either to do
this or else to keep there a great number of cavalry and infantry  a
prince does not spend much on colonies  for with little or no expense
he can send them out and keep them there  and he offends a minority
only of the citizens from whom he takes lands and houses to give them
to the new inhabitants  and those whom he offends  remaining poor and
scattered  are never able to injure him  whilst the rest being
uninjured are easily kept quiet  and at the same time are anxious not
to err for fear it should happen to them as it has to those who have
been despoiled  in conclusion  i say that these colonies are not
costly  they are more faithful  they injure less  and the injured  as
has been said  being poor and scattered  cannot hurt  upon this  one
has to remark that men ought either to be well treated or crushed 
because they can avenge themselves of lighter injuries  of more serious
ones they cannot  therefore the injury that is to be done to a man
ought to be of such a kind that one does not stand in fear of revenge 

but in maintaining armed men there in place of colonies one spends much
more  having to consume on the garrison all the income from the state 
so that the acquisition turns into a loss  and many more are
exasperated  because the whole state is injured  through the shifting
of the garrison up and down all become acquainted with hardship  and
all become hostile  and they are enemies who  whilst beaten on their
own ground  are yet able to do hurt  for every reason  therefore  such
guards are as useless as a colony is useful 

again  the prince who holds a country differing in the above respects
ought to make himself the head and defender of his less powerful
neighbours  and to weaken the more powerful amongst them  taking care
that no foreigner as powerful as himself shall  by any accident  get a
footing there  for it will always happen that such a one will be
introduced by those who are discontented  either through excess of
ambition or through fear  as one has seen already  the romans were
brought into greece by the ætolians  and in every other country where
they obtained a footing they were brought in by the inhabitants  and
the usual course of affairs is that  as soon as a powerful foreigner
enters a country  all the subject states are drawn to him  moved by the
hatred which they feel against the ruling power  so that in respect to
those subject states he has not to take any trouble to gain them over
to himself  for the whole of them quickly rally to the state which he
has acquired there  he has only to take care that they do not get hold
of too much power and too much authority  and then with his own forces 
and with their goodwill  he can easily keep down the more powerful of
them  so as to remain entirely master in the country  and he who does
not properly manage this business will soon lose what he has acquired 
and whilst he does hold it he will have endless difficulties and
troubles 

the romans  in the countries which they annexed  observed closely these
measures  they sent colonies and maintained friendly relations with 2 
the minor powers  without increasing their strength  they kept down the
greater  and did not allow any strong foreign powers to gain authority 
greece appears to me sufficient for an example  the achaeans and
ætolians were kept friendly by them  the kingdom of macedonia was
humbled  antiochus was driven out  yet the merits of the achaeans and
ætolians never secured for them permission to increase their power  nor
did the persuasions of philip ever induce the romans to be his friends
without first humbling him  nor did the influence of antiochus make
them agree that he should retain any lordship over the country  because
the romans did in these instances what all prudent princes ought to do 
who have to regard not only present troubles  but also future ones  for
which they must prepare with every energy  because  when foreseen  it
is easy to remedy them  but if you wait until they approach  the
medicine is no longer in time because the malady has become incurable 
for it happens in this  as the physicians say it happens in hectic
fever  that in the beginning of the malady it is easy to cure but
difficult to detect  but in the course of time  not having been either
detected or treated in the beginning  it becomes easy to detect but
difficult to cure  thus it happens in affairs of state  for when the
evils that arise have been foreseen (which it is only given to a wise
man to see)  they can be quickly redressed  but when  through not
having been foreseen  they have been permitted to grow in a way that
every one can see them  there is no longer a remedy  therefore  the
romans  foreseeing troubles  dealt with them at once  and  even to
avoid a war  would not let them come to a head  for they knew that war
is not to be avoided  but is only to be put off to the advantage of
others  moreover they wished to fight with philip and antiochus in
greece so as not to have to do it in italy  they could have avoided
both  but this they did not wish  nor did that ever please them which
is forever in the mouths of the wise ones of our time —let us enjoy the
benefits of the time—but rather the benefits of their own valour and
prudence  for time drives everything before it  and is able to bring
with it good as well as evil  and evil as well as good 

  2  see remark in the introduction on the word “intrattenere ”

but let us turn to france and inquire whether she has done any of the
things mentioned  i will speak of louis 3  (and not of charles) 4  as
the one whose conduct is the better to be observed  he having held
possession of italy for the longest period  and you will see that he
has done the opposite to those things which ought to be done to retain
a state composed of divers elements 

  3  louis xii  king of france  “the father of the people ” born 1462 
 died 1515 

  4  charles viii  king of france  born 1470  died 1498 

king louis was brought into italy by the ambition of the venetians  who
desired to obtain half the state of lombardy by his intervention  i
will not blame the course taken by the king  because  wishing to get a
foothold in italy  and having no friends there—seeing rather that every
door was shut to him owing to the conduct of charles—he was forced to
accept those friendships which he could get  and he would have
succeeded very quickly in his design if in other matters he had not
made some mistakes  the king  however  having acquired lombardy 
regained at once the authority which charles had lost  genoa yielded 
the florentines became his friends  the marquess of mantua  the duke of
ferrara  the bentivogli  my lady of forli  the lords of faenza  of
pesaro  of rimini  of camerino  of piombino  the lucchese  the pisans 
the sienese—everybody made advances to him to become his friend  then
could the venetians realize the rashness of the course taken by them 
which  in order that they might secure two towns in lombardy  had made
the king master of two thirds of italy 

let any one now consider with what little difficulty the king could
have maintained his position in italy had he observed the rules above
laid down  and kept all his friends secure and protected  for although
they were numerous they were both weak and timid  some afraid of the
church  some of the venetians  and thus they would always have been
forced to stand in with him  and by their means he could easily have
made himself secure against those who remained powerful  but he was no
sooner in milan than he did the contrary by assisting pope alexander to
occupy the romagna  it never occurred to him that by this action he was
weakening himself  depriving himself of friends and of those who had
thrown themselves into his lap  whilst he aggrandized the church by
adding much temporal power to the spiritual  thus giving it greater
authority  and having committed this prime error  he was obliged to
follow it up  so much so that  to put an end to the ambition of
alexander  and to prevent his becoming the master of tuscany  he was
himself forced to come into italy 

and as if it were not enough to have aggrandized the church  and
deprived himself of friends  he  wishing to have the kingdom of naples 
divided it with the king of spain  and where he was the prime arbiter
in italy he takes an associate  so that the ambitious of that country
and the malcontents of his own should have somewhere to shelter  and
whereas he could have left in the kingdom his own pensioner as king  he
drove him out  to put one there who was able to drive him  louis  out
in turn 

the wish to acquire is in truth very natural and common  and men always
do so when they can  and for this they will be praised not blamed  but
when they cannot do so  yet wish to do so by any means  then there is
folly and blame  therefore  if france could have attacked naples with
her own forces she ought to have done so  if she could not  then she
ought not to have divided it  and if the partition which she made with
the venetians in lombardy was justified by the excuse that by it she
got a foothold in italy  this other partition merited blame  for it had
not the excuse of that necessity 

therefore louis made these five errors  he destroyed the minor powers 
he increased the strength of one of the greater powers in italy  he
brought in a foreign power  he did not settle in the country  he did
not send colonies  which errors  had he lived  were not enough to
injure him had he not made a sixth by taking away their dominions from
the venetians  because  had he not aggrandized the church  nor brought
spain into italy  it would have been very reasonable and necessary to
humble them  but having first taken these steps  he ought never to have
consented to their ruin  for they  being powerful  would always have
kept off others from designs on lombardy  to which the venetians would
never have consented except to become masters themselves there  also
because the others would not wish to take lombardy from france in order
to give it to the venetians  and to run counter to both they would not
have had the courage 

and if any one should say  “king louis yielded the romagna to alexander
and the kingdom to spain to avoid war ” i answer for the reasons given
above that a blunder ought never to be perpetrated to avoid war 
because it is not to be avoided  but is only deferred to your
disadvantage  and if another should allege the pledge which the king
had given to the pope that he would assist him in the enterprise  in
exchange for the dissolution of his marriage 5  and for the cap to
rouen  6  to that i reply what i shall write later on concerning the
faith of princes  and how it ought to be kept 

  5  louis xii divorced his wife  jeanne  daughter of louis xi  and
 married in 1499 anne of brittany  widow of charles viii  in order to
 retain the duchy of brittany for the crown 

  6  the archbishop of rouen  he was georges d’amboise  created a
 cardinal by alexander vi  born 1460  died 1510 

thus king louis lost lombardy by not having followed any of the
conditions observed by those who have taken possession of countries and
wished to retain them  nor is there any miracle in this  but much that
is reasonable and quite natural  and on these matters i spoke at nantes
with rouen  when valentino  as cesare borgia  the son of pope
alexander  was usually called  occupied the romagna  and on cardinal
rouen observing to me that the italians did not understand war  i
replied to him that the french did not understand statecraft  meaning
that otherwise they would not have allowed the church to reach such
greatness  and in fact it has been seen that the greatness of the
church and of spain in italy has been caused by france  and her ruin
may be attributed to them  from this a general rule is drawn which
never or rarely fails  that he who is the cause of another becoming
powerful is ruined  because that predominancy has been brought about
either by astuteness or else by force  and both are distrusted by him
who has been raised to power 




chapter iv 
why the kingdom of darius  conquered by alexander  did not rebel
against the successors of alexander at his death


considering the difficulties which men have had to hold to a newly
acquired state  some might wonder how  seeing that alexander the great
became the master of asia in a few years  and died whilst it was
scarcely settled (whence it might appear reasonable that the whole
empire would have rebelled)  nevertheless his successors maintained
themselves  and had to meet no other difficulty than that which arose
among themselves from their own ambitions 

i answer that the principalities of which one has record are found to
be governed in two different ways  either by a prince  with a body of
servants  who assist him to govern the kingdom as ministers by his
favour and permission  or by a prince and barons  who hold that dignity
by antiquity of blood and not by the grace of the prince  such barons
have states and their own subjects  who recognize them as lords and
hold them in natural affection  those states that are governed by a
prince and his servants hold their prince in more consideration 
because in all the country there is no one who is recognized as
superior to him  and if they yield obedience to another they do it as
to a minister and official  and they do not bear him any particular
affection 

the examples of these two governments in our time are the turk and the
king of france  the entire monarchy of the turk is governed by one
lord  the others are his servants  and  dividing his kingdom into
sanjaks  he sends there different administrators  and shifts and
changes them as he chooses  but the king of france is placed in the
midst of an ancient body of lords  acknowledged by their own subjects 
and beloved by them  they have their own prerogatives  nor can the king
take these away except at his peril  therefore  he who considers both
of these states will recognize great difficulties in seizing the state
of the turk  but  once it is conquered  great ease in holding it  the
causes of the difficulties in seizing the kingdom of the turk are that
the usurper cannot be called in by the princes of the kingdom  nor can
he hope to be assisted in his designs by the revolt of those whom the
lord has around him  this arises from the reasons given above  for his
ministers  being all slaves and bondmen  can only be corrupted with
great difficulty  and one can expect little advantage from them when
they have been corrupted  as they cannot carry the people with them 
for the reasons assigned  hence  he who attacks the turk must bear in
mind that he will find him united  and he will have to rely more on his
own strength than on the revolt of others  but  if once the turk has
been conquered  and routed in the field in such a way that he cannot
replace his armies  there is nothing to fear but the family of this
prince  and  this being exterminated  there remains no one to fear  the
others having no credit with the people  and as the conqueror did not
rely on them before his victory  so he ought not to fear them after it 

the contrary happens in kingdoms governed like that of france  because
one can easily enter there by gaining over some baron of the kingdom 
for one always finds malcontents and such as desire a change  such men 
for the reasons given  can open the way into the state and render the
victory easy  but if you wish to hold it afterwards  you meet with
infinite difficulties  both from those who have assisted you and from
those you have crushed  nor is it enough for you to have exterminated
the family of the prince  because the lords that remain make themselves
the heads of fresh movements against you  and as you are unable either
to satisfy or exterminate them  that state is lost whenever time brings
the opportunity 

now if you will consider what was the nature of the government of
darius  you will find it similar to the kingdom of the turk  and
therefore it was only necessary for alexander  first to overthrow him
in the field  and then to take the country from him  after which
victory  darius being killed  the state remained secure to alexander 
for the above reasons  and if his successors had been united they would
have enjoyed it securely and at their ease  for there were no tumults
raised in the kingdom except those they provoked themselves 

but it is impossible to hold with such tranquillity states constituted
like that of france  hence arose those frequent rebellions against the
romans in spain  france  and greece  owing to the many principalities
there were in these states  of which  as long as the memory of them
endured  the romans always held an insecure possession  but with the
power and long continuance of the empire the memory of them passed
away  and the romans then became secure possessors  and when fighting
afterwards amongst themselves  each one was able to attach to himself
his own parts of the country  according to the authority he had assumed
there  and the family of the former lord being exterminated  none other
than the romans were acknowledged 

when these things are remembered no one will marvel at the ease with
which alexander held the empire of asia  or at the difficulties which
others have had to keep an acquisition  such as pyrrhus and many more 
this is not occasioned by the little or abundance of ability in the
conqueror  but by the want of uniformity in the subject state 




chapter v 
concerning the way to govern cities or principalities which lived under
their own laws before they were annexed


whenever those states which have been acquired as stated have been
accustomed to live under their own laws and in freedom  there are three
courses for those who wish to hold them  the first is to ruin them  the
next is to reside there in person  the third is to permit them to live
under their own laws  drawing a tribute  and establishing within it an
oligarchy which will keep it friendly to you  because such a
government  being created by the prince  knows that it cannot stand
without his friendship and interest  and does its utmost to support
him  and therefore he who would keep a city accustomed to freedom will
hold it more easily by the means of its own citizens than in any other
way 

there are  for example  the spartans and the romans  the spartans held
athens and thebes  establishing there an oligarchy  nevertheless they
lost them  the romans  in order to hold capua  carthage  and numantia 
dismantled them  and did not lose them  they wished to hold greece as
the spartans held it  making it free and permitting its laws  and did
not succeed  so to hold it they were compelled to dismantle many cities
in the country  for in truth there is no safe way to retain them
otherwise than by ruining them  and he who becomes master of a city
accustomed to freedom and does not destroy it  may expect to be
destroyed by it  for in rebellion it has always the watchword of
liberty and its ancient privileges as a rallying point  which neither
time nor benefits will ever cause it to forget  and whatever you may do
or provide against  they never forget that name or their privileges
unless they are disunited or dispersed  but at every chance they
immediately rally to them  as pisa after the hundred years she had been
held in bondage by the florentines 

but when cities or countries are accustomed to live under a prince  and
his family is exterminated  they  being on the one hand accustomed to
obey and on the other hand not having the old prince  cannot agree in
making one from amongst themselves  and they do not know how to govern
themselves  for this reason they are very slow to take up arms  and a
prince can gain them to himself and secure them much more easily  but
in republics there is more vitality  greater hatred  and more desire
for vengeance  which will never permit them to allow the memory of
their former liberty to rest  so that the safest way is to destroy them
or to reside there 




chapter vi 
concerning new principalities which are acquired by one’s own arms and
ability


let no one be surprised if  in speaking of entirely new principalities
as i shall do  i adduce the highest examples both of prince and of
state  because men  walking almost always in paths beaten by others 
and following by imitation their deeds  are yet unable to keep entirely
to the ways of others or attain to the power of those they imitate  a
wise man ought always to follow the paths beaten by great men  and to
imitate those who have been supreme  so that if his ability does not
equal theirs  at least it will savour of it  let him act like the
clever archers who  designing to hit the mark which yet appears too far
distant  and knowing the limits to which the strength of their bow
attains  take aim much higher than the mark  not to reach by their
strength or arrow to so great a height  but to be able with the aid of
so high an aim to hit the mark they wish to reach 

i say  therefore  that in entirely new principalities  where there is a
new prince  more or less difficulty is found in keeping them 
accordingly as there is more or less ability in him who has acquired
the state  now  as the fact of becoming a prince from a private station
presupposes either ability or fortune  it is clear that one or other of
these things will mitigate in some degree many difficulties 
nevertheless  he who has relied least on fortune is established the
strongest  further  it facilitates matters when the prince  having no
other state  is compelled to reside there in person 

but to come to those who  by their own ability and not through fortune 
have risen to be princes  i say that moses  cyrus  romulus  theseus 
and such like are the most excellent examples  and although one may not
discuss moses  he having been a mere executor of the will of god  yet
he ought to be admired  if only for that favour which made him worthy
to speak with god  but in considering cyrus and others who have
acquired or founded kingdoms  all will be found admirable  and if their
particular deeds and conduct shall be considered  they will not be
found inferior to those of moses  although he had so great a preceptor 
and in examining their actions and lives one cannot see that they owed
anything to fortune beyond opportunity  which brought them the material
to mould into the form which seemed best to them  without that
opportunity their powers of mind would have been extinguished  and
without those powers the opportunity would have come in vain 

it was necessary  therefore  to moses that he should find the people of
israel in egypt enslaved and oppressed by the egyptians  in order that
they should be disposed to follow him so as to be delivered out of
bondage  it was necessary that romulus should not remain in alba  and
that he should be abandoned at his birth  in order that he should
become king of rome and founder of the fatherland  it was necessary
that cyrus should find the persians discontented with the government of
the medes  and the medes soft and effeminate through their long peace 
theseus could not have shown his ability had he not found the athenians
dispersed  these opportunities  therefore  made those men fortunate 
and their high ability enabled them to recognize the opportunity
whereby their country was ennobled and made famous 

those who by valorous ways become princes  like these men  acquire a
principality with difficulty  but they keep it with ease  the
difficulties they have in acquiring it rise in part from the new rules
and methods which they are forced to introduce to establish their
government and its security  and it ought to be remembered that there
is nothing more difficult to take in hand  more perilous to conduct  or
more uncertain in its success  than to take the lead in the
introduction of a new order of things  because the innovator has for
enemies all those who have done well under the old conditions  and
lukewarm defenders in those who may do well under the new  this
coolness arises partly from fear of the opponents  who have the laws on
their side  and partly from the incredulity of men  who do not readily
believe in new things until they have had a long experience of them 
thus it happens that whenever those who are hostile have the
opportunity to attack they do it like partisans  whilst the others
defend lukewarmly  in such wise that the prince is endangered along
with them 

it is necessary  therefore  if we desire to discuss this matter
thoroughly  to inquire whether these innovators can rely on themselves
or have to depend on others  that is to say  whether  to consummate
their enterprise  have they to use prayers or can they use force? in
the first instance they always succeed badly  and never compass
anything  but when they can rely on themselves and use force  then they
are rarely endangered  hence it is that all armed prophets have
conquered  and the unarmed ones have been destroyed  besides the
reasons mentioned  the nature of the people is variable  and whilst it
is easy to persuade them  it is difficult to fix them in that
persuasion  and thus it is necessary to take such measures that  when
they believe no longer  it may be possible to make them believe by
force 

if moses  cyrus  theseus  and romulus had been unarmed they could not
have enforced their constitutions for long—as happened in our time to
fra girolamo savonarola  who was ruined with his new order of things
immediately the multitude believed in him no longer  and he had no
means of keeping steadfast those who believed or of making the
unbelievers to believe  therefore such as these have great difficulties
in consummating their enterprise  for all their dangers are in the
ascent  yet with ability they will overcome them  but when these are
overcome  and those who envied them their success are exterminated 
they will begin to be respected  and they will continue afterwards
powerful  secure  honoured  and happy 

to these great examples i wish to add a lesser one  still it bears some
resemblance to them  and i wish it to suffice me for all of a like
kind  it is hiero the syracusan  1  this man rose from a private
station to be prince of syracuse  nor did he  either  owe anything to
fortune but opportunity  for the syracusans  being oppressed  chose him
for their captain  afterwards he was rewarded by being made their
prince  he was of so great ability  even as a private citizen  that one
who writes of him says he wanted nothing but a kingdom to be a king 
this man abolished the old soldiery  organized the new  gave up old
alliances  made new ones  and as he had his own soldiers and allies  on
such foundations he was able to build any edifice  thus  whilst he had
endured much trouble in acquiring  he had but little in keeping 

  1  hiero ii  born about 307 b c   died 216 b c 




chapter vii 
concerning new principalities which are acquired either by the arms of
others or by good fortune


those who solely by good fortune become princes from being private
citizens have little trouble in rising  but much in keeping atop  they
have not any difficulties on the way up  because they fly  but they
have many when they reach the summit  such are those to whom some state
is given either for money or by the favour of him who bestows it  as
happened to many in greece  in the cities of ionia and of the
hellespont  where princes were made by darius  in order that they might
hold the cities both for his security and his glory  as also were those
emperors who  by the corruption of the soldiers  from being citizens
came to empire  such stand simply elevated upon the goodwill and the
fortune of him who has elevated them—two most inconstant and unstable
things  neither have they the knowledge requisite for the position 
because  unless they are men of great worth and ability  it is not
reasonable to expect that they should know how to command  having
always lived in a private condition  besides  they cannot hold it
because they have not forces which they can keep friendly and faithful 

states that rise unexpectedly  then  like all other things in nature
which are born and grow rapidly  cannot leave their foundations and
correspondencies 1  fixed in such a way that the first storm will not
overthrow them  unless  as is said  those who unexpectedly become
princes are men of so much ability that they know they have to be
prepared at once to hold that which fortune has thrown into their laps 
and that those foundations  which others have laid  before  they became
princes  they must lay  afterwards  

  1  “le radici e corrispondenze ” their roots (i e  foundations) and
 correspondencies or relations with other states—a common meaning of
 “correspondence” and “correspondency” in the sixteenth and seventeenth
 centuries 

concerning these two methods of rising to be a prince by ability or
fortune  i wish to adduce two examples within our own recollection  and
these are francesco sforza 2  and cesare borgia  francesco  by proper
means and with great ability  from being a private person rose to be
duke of milan  and that which he had acquired with a thousand anxieties
he kept with little trouble  on the other hand  cesare borgia  called
by the people duke valentino  acquired his state during the ascendancy
of his father  and on its decline he lost it  notwithstanding that he
had taken every measure and done all that ought to be done by a wise
and able man to fix firmly his roots in the states which the arms and
fortunes of others had bestowed on him 

  2  francesco sforza  born 1401  died 1466  he married bianca maria
 visconti  a natural daughter of filippo visconti  the duke of milan 
 on whose death he procured his own elevation to the duchy  machiavelli
 was the accredited agent of the florentine republic to cesare borgia
 (1478 1507) during the transactions which led up to the assassinations
 of the orsini and vitelli at sinigalia  and along with his letters to
 his chiefs in florence he has left an account  written ten years
 before  the prince   of the proceedings of the duke in his
 “descritione del modo tenuto dal duca valentino nello ammazzare
 vitellozzo vitelli ” etc   a translation of which is appended to the
 present work 

because  as is stated above  he who has not first laid his foundations
may be able with great ability to lay them afterwards  but they will be
laid with trouble to the architect and danger to the building  if 
therefore  all the steps taken by the duke be considered  it will be
seen that he laid solid foundations for his future power  and i do not
consider it superfluous to discuss them  because i do not know what
better precepts to give a new prince than the example of his actions 
and if his dispositions were of no avail  that was not his fault  but
the extraordinary and extreme malignity of fortune 

alexander the sixth  in wishing to aggrandize the duke  his son  had
many immediate and prospective difficulties  firstly  he did not see
his way to make him master of any state that was not a state of the
church  and if he was willing to rob the church he knew that the duke
of milan and the venetians would not consent  because faenza and rimini
were already under the protection of the venetians  besides this  he
saw the arms of italy  especially those by which he might have been
assisted  in hands that would fear the aggrandizement of the pope 
namely  the orsini and the colonnesi and their following  it behoved
him  therefore  to upset this state of affairs and embroil the powers 
so as to make himself securely master of part of their states  this was
easy for him to do  because he found the venetians  moved by other
reasons  inclined to bring back the french into italy  he would not
only not oppose this  but he would render it more easy by dissolving
the former marriage of king louis  therefore the king came into italy
with the assistance of the venetians and the consent of alexander  he
was no sooner in milan than the pope had soldiers from him for the
attempt on the romagna  which yielded to him on the reputation of the
king  the duke  therefore  having acquired the romagna and beaten the
colonnesi  while wishing to hold that and to advance further  was
hindered by two things  the one  his forces did not appear loyal to
him  the other  the goodwill of france  that is to say  he feared that
the forces of the orsini  which he was using  would not stand to him 
that not only might they hinder him from winning more  but might
themselves seize what he had won  and that the king might also do the
same  of the orsini he had a warning when  after taking faenza and
attacking bologna  he saw them go very unwillingly to that attack  and
as to the king  he learned his mind when he himself  after taking the
duchy of urbino  attacked tuscany  and the king made him desist from
that undertaking  hence the duke decided to depend no more upon the
arms and the luck of others 

for the first thing he weakened the orsini and colonnesi parties in
rome  by gaining to himself all their adherents who were gentlemen 
making them his gentlemen  giving them good pay  and  according to
their rank  honouring them with office and command in such a way that
in a few months all attachment to the factions was destroyed and turned
entirely to the duke  after this he awaited an opportunity to crush the
orsini  having scattered the adherents of the colonna house  this came
to him soon and he used it well  for the orsini  perceiving at length
that the aggrandizement of the duke and the church was ruin to them 
called a meeting of the magione in perugia  from this sprung the
rebellion at urbino and the tumults in the romagna  with endless
dangers to the duke  all of which he overcame with the help of the
french  having restored his authority  not to leave it at risk by
trusting either to the french or other outside forces  he had recourse
to his wiles  and he knew so well how to conceal his mind that  by the
mediation of signor pagolo—whom the duke did not fail to secure with
all kinds of attention  giving him money  apparel  and horses—the
orsini were reconciled  so that their simplicity brought them into his
power at sinigalia  3  having exterminated the leaders  and turned
their partisans into his friends  the duke laid sufficiently good
foundations to his power  having all the romagna and the duchy of
urbino  and the people now beginning to appreciate their prosperity  he
gained them all over to himself  and as this point is worthy of notice 
and to be imitated by others  i am not willing to leave it out 

  3  sinigalia  31st december 1502 

when the duke occupied the romagna he found it under the rule of weak
masters  who rather plundered their subjects than ruled them  and gave
them more cause for disunion than for union  so that the country was
full of robbery  quarrels  and every kind of violence  and so  wishing
to bring back peace and obedience to authority  he considered it
necessary to give it a good governor  thereupon he promoted messer
ramiro d’orco  4  a swift and cruel man  to whom he gave the fullest
power  this man in a short time restored peace and unity with the
greatest success  afterwards the duke considered that it was not
advisable to confer such excessive authority  for he had no doubt but
that he would become odious  so he set up a court of judgment in the
country  under a most excellent president  wherein all cities had their
advocates  and because he knew that the past severity had caused some
hatred against himself  so  to clear himself in the minds of the
people  and gain them entirely to himself  he desired to show that  if
any cruelty had been practised  it had not originated with him  but in
the natural sternness of the minister  under this pretence he took
ramiro  and one morning caused him to be executed and left on the
piazza at cesena with the block and a bloody knife at his side  the
barbarity of this spectacle caused the people to be at once satisfied
and dismayed 

  4  ramiro d’orco  ramiro de lorqua 

but let us return whence we started  i say that the duke  finding
himself now sufficiently powerful and partly secured from immediate
dangers by having armed himself in his own way  and having in a great
measure crushed those forces in his vicinity that could injure him if
he wished to proceed with his conquest  had next to consider france 
for he knew that the king  who too late was aware of his mistake  would
not support him  and from this time he began to seek new alliances and
to temporize with france in the expedition which she was making towards
the kingdom of naples against the spaniards who were besieging gaeta 
it was his intention to secure himself against them  and this he would
have quickly accomplished had alexander lived 

such was his line of action as to present affairs  but as to the future
he had to fear  in the first place  that a new successor to the church
might not be friendly to him and might seek to take from him that which
alexander had given him  so he decided to act in four ways  firstly  by
exterminating the families of those lords whom he had despoiled  so as
to take away that pretext from the pope  secondly  by winning to
himself all the gentlemen of rome  so as to be able to curb the pope
with their aid  as has been observed  thirdly  by converting the
college more to himself  fourthly  by acquiring so much power before
the pope should die that he could by his own measures resist the first
shock  of these four things  at the death of alexander  he had
accomplished three  for he had killed as many of the dispossessed lords
as he could lay hands on  and few had escaped  he had won over the
roman gentlemen  and he had the most numerous party in the college  and
as to any fresh acquisition  he intended to become master of tuscany 
for he already possessed perugia and piombino  and pisa was under his
protection  and as he had no longer to study france (for the french
were already driven out of the kingdom of naples by the spaniards  and
in this way both were compelled to buy his goodwill)  he pounced down
upon pisa  after this  lucca and siena yielded at once  partly through
hatred and partly through fear of the florentines  and the florentines
would have had no remedy had he continued to prosper  as he was
prospering the year that alexander died  for he had acquired so much
power and reputation that he would have stood by himself  and no longer
have depended on the luck and the forces of others  but solely on his
own power and ability 

but alexander died five years after he had first drawn the sword  he
left the duke with the state of romagna alone consolidated  with the
rest in the air  between two most powerful hostile armies  and sick
unto death  yet there were in the duke such boldness and ability  and
he knew so well how men are to be won or lost  and so firm were the
foundations which in so short a time he had laid  that if he had not
had those armies on his back  or if he had been in good health  he
would have overcome all difficulties  and it is seen that his
foundations were good  for the romagna awaited him for more than a
month  in rome  although but half alive  he remained secure  and whilst
the baglioni  the vitelli  and the orsini might come to rome  they
could not effect anything against him  if he could not have made pope
him whom he wished  at least the one whom he did not wish would not
have been elected  but if he had been in sound health at the death of
alexander  5  everything would have been different to him  on the day
that julius the second 6  was elected  he told me that he had thought
of everything that might occur at the death of his father  and had
provided a remedy for all  except that he had never anticipated that 
when the death did happen  he himself would be on the point to die 

  5  alexander vi died of fever  18th august 1503 

  6  julius ii was giuliano della rovere  cardinal of san pietro ad
 vincula  born 1443  died 1513 

when all the actions of the duke are recalled  i do not know how to
blame him  but rather it appears to be  as i have said  that i ought to
offer him for imitation to all those who  by the fortune or the arms of
others  are raised to government  because he  having a lofty spirit and
far reaching aims  could not have regulated his conduct otherwise  and
only the shortness of the life of alexander and his own sickness
frustrated his designs  therefore  he who considers it necessary to
secure himself in his new principality  to win friends  to overcome
either by force or fraud  to make himself beloved and feared by the
people  to be followed and revered by the soldiers  to exterminate
those who have power or reason to hurt him  to change the old order of
things for new  to be severe and gracious  magnanimous and liberal  to
destroy a disloyal soldiery and to create new  to maintain friendship
with kings and princes in such a way that they must help him with zeal
and offend with caution  cannot find a more lively example than the
actions of this man 

only can he be blamed for the election of julius the second  in whom he
made a bad choice  because  as is said  not being able to elect a pope
to his own mind  he could have hindered any other from being elected
pope  and he ought never to have consented to the election of any
cardinal whom he had injured or who had cause to fear him if they
became pontiffs  for men injure either from fear or hatred  those whom
he had injured  amongst others  were san pietro ad vincula  colonna 
san giorgio  and ascanio  7  the rest  in becoming pope  had to fear
him  rouen and the spaniards excepted  the latter from their
relationship and obligations  the former from his influence  the
kingdom of france having relations with him  therefore  above
everything  the duke ought to have created a spaniard pope  and 
failing him  he ought to have consented to rouen and not san pietro ad
vincula  he who believes that new benefits will cause great personages
to forget old injuries is deceived  therefore  the duke erred in his
choice  and it was the cause of his ultimate ruin 

  7  san giorgio is raffaello riario  ascanio is ascanio sforza 




chapter viii 
concerning those who have obtained a principality by wickedness


although a prince may rise from a private station in two ways  neither
of which can be entirely attributed to fortune or genius  yet it is
manifest to me that i must not be silent on them  although one could be
more copiously treated when i discuss republics  these methods are
when  either by some wicked or nefarious ways  one ascends to the
principality  or when by the favour of his fellow citizens a private
person becomes the prince of his country  and speaking of the first
method  it will be illustrated by two examples—one ancient  the other
modern—and without entering further into the subject  i consider these
two examples will suffice those who may be compelled to follow them 

agathocles  the sicilian  1  became king of syracuse not only from a
private but from a low and abject position  this man  the son of a
potter  through all the changes in his fortunes always led an infamous
life  nevertheless  he accompanied his infamies with so much ability of
mind and body that  having devoted himself to the military profession 
he rose through its ranks to be praetor of syracuse  being established
in that position  and having deliberately resolved to make himself
prince and to seize by violence  without obligation to others  that
which had been conceded to him by assent  he came to an understanding
for this purpose with amilcar  the carthaginian  who  with his army 
was fighting in sicily  one morning he assembled the people and the
senate of syracuse  as if he had to discuss with them things relating
to the republic  and at a given signal the soldiers killed all the
senators and the richest of the people  these dead  he seized and held
the princedom of that city without any civil commotion  and although he
was twice routed by the carthaginians  and ultimately besieged  yet not
only was he able to defend his city  but leaving part of his men for
its defence  with the others he attacked africa  and in a short time
raised the siege of syracuse  the carthaginians  reduced to extreme
necessity  were compelled to come to terms with agathocles  and 
leaving sicily to him  had to be content with the possession of africa 

  1  agathocles the sicilian  born 361 b c   died 289 b c 

therefore  he who considers the actions and the genius of this man will
see nothing  or little  which can be attributed to fortune  inasmuch as
he attained pre eminence  as is shown above  not by the favour of any
one  but step by step in the military profession  which steps were
gained with a thousand troubles and perils  and were afterwards boldly
held by him with many hazardous dangers  yet it cannot be called talent
to slay fellow citizens  to deceive friends  to be without faith 
without mercy  without religion  such methods may gain empire  but not
glory  still  if the courage of agathocles in entering into and
extricating himself from dangers be considered  together with his
greatness of mind in enduring and overcoming hardships  it cannot be
seen why he should be esteemed less than the most notable captain 
nevertheless  his barbarous cruelty and inhumanity with infinite
wickedness do not permit him to be celebrated among the most excellent
men  what he achieved cannot be attributed either to fortune or genius 

in our times  during the rule of alexander the sixth  oliverotto da
fermo  having been left an orphan many years before  was brought up by
his maternal uncle  giovanni fogliani  and in the early days of his
youth sent to fight under pagolo vitelli  that  being trained under his
discipline  he might attain some high position in the military
profession  after pagolo died  he fought under his brother vitellozzo 
and in a very short time  being endowed with wit and a vigorous body
and mind  he became the first man in his profession  but it appearing a
paltry thing to serve under others  he resolved  with the aid of some
citizens of fermo  to whom the slavery of their country was dearer than
its liberty  and with the help of the vitelleschi  to seize fermo  so
he wrote to giovanni fogliani that  having been away from home for many
years  he wished to visit him and his city  and in some measure to look
upon his patrimony  and although he had not laboured to acquire
anything except honour  yet  in order that the citizens should see he
had not spent his time in vain  he desired to come honourably  so would
be accompanied by one hundred horsemen  his friends and retainers  and
he entreated giovanni to arrange that he should be received honourably
by the fermians  all of which would be not only to his honour  but also
to that of giovanni himself  who had brought him up 

giovanni  therefore  did not fail in any attentions due to his nephew 
and he caused him to be honourably received by the fermians  and he
lodged him in his own house  where  having passed some days  and having
arranged what was necessary for his wicked designs  oliverotto gave a
solemn banquet to which he invited giovanni fogliani and the chiefs of
fermo  when the viands and all the other entertainments that are usual
in such banquets were finished  oliverotto artfully began certain grave
discourses  speaking of the greatness of pope alexander and his son
cesare  and of their enterprises  to which discourse giovanni and
others answered  but he rose at once  saying that such matters ought to
be discussed in a more private place  and he betook himself to a
chamber  whither giovanni and the rest of the citizens went in after
him  no sooner were they seated than soldiers issued from secret places
and slaughtered giovanni and the rest  after these murders oliverotto 
mounted on horseback  rode up and down the town and besieged the chief
magistrate in the palace  so that in fear the people were forced to
obey him  and to form a government  of which he made himself the
prince  he killed all the malcontents who were able to injure him  and
strengthened himself with new civil and military ordinances  in such a
way that  in the year during which he held the principality  not only
was he secure in the city of fermo  but he had become formidable to all
his neighbours  and his destruction would have been as difficult as
that of agathocles if he had not allowed himself to be overreached by
cesare borgia  who took him with the orsini and vitelli at sinigalia 
as was stated above  thus one year after he had committed this
parricide  he was strangled  together with vitellozzo  whom he had made
his leader in valour and wickedness 

some may wonder how it can happen that agathocles  and his like  after
infinite treacheries and cruelties  should live for long secure in his
country  and defend himself from external enemies  and never be
conspired against by his own citizens  seeing that many others  by
means of cruelty  have never been able even in peaceful times to hold
the state  still less in the doubtful times of war  i believe that this
follows from severities 2  being badly or properly used  those may be
called properly used  if of evil it is possible to speak well  that are
applied at one blow and are necessary to one’s security  and that are
not persisted in afterwards unless they can be turned to the advantage
of the subjects  the badly employed are those which  notwithstanding
they may be few in the commencement  multiply with time rather than
decrease  those who practise the first system are able  by aid of god
or man  to mitigate in some degree their rule  as agathocles did  it is
impossible for those who follow the other to maintain themselves 

  2  mr burd suggests that this word probably comes near the modern
 equivalent of machiavelli’s thought when he speaks of “crudelta” than
 the more obvious “cruelties ”

hence it is to be remarked that  in seizing a state  the usurper ought
to examine closely into all those injuries which it is necessary for
him to inflict  and to do them all at one stroke so as not to have to
repeat them daily  and thus by not unsettling men he will be able to
reassure them  and win them to himself by benefits  he who does
otherwise  either from timidity or evil advice  is always compelled to
keep the knife in his hand  neither can he rely on his subjects  nor
can they attach themselves to him  owing to their continued and
repeated wrongs  for injuries ought to be done all at one time  so
that  being tasted less  they offend less  benefits ought to be given
little by little  so that the flavour of them may last longer 

and above all things  a prince ought to live amongst his people in such
a way that no unexpected circumstances  whether of good or evil  shall
make him change  because if the necessity for this comes in troubled
times  you are too late for harsh measures  and mild ones will not help
you  for they will be considered as forced from you  and no one will be
under any obligation to you for them 




chapter ix 
concerning a civil principality


but coming to the other point—where a leading citizen becomes the
prince of his country  not by wickedness or any intolerable violence 
but by the favour of his fellow citizens—this may be called a civil
principality  nor is genius or fortune altogether necessary to attain
to it  but rather a happy shrewdness  i say then that such a
principality is obtained either by the favour of the people or by the
favour of the nobles  because in all cities these two distinct parties
are found  and from this it arises that the people do not wish to be
ruled nor oppressed by the nobles  and the nobles wish to rule and
oppress the people  and from these two opposite desires there arises in
cities one of three results  either a principality  self government  or
anarchy 

a principality is created either by the people or by the nobles 
accordingly as one or other of them has the opportunity  for the
nobles  seeing they cannot withstand the people  begin to cry up the
reputation of one of themselves  and they make him a prince  so that
under his shadow they can give vent to their ambitions  the people 
finding they cannot resist the nobles  also cry up the reputation of
one of themselves  and make him a prince so as to be defended by his
authority  he who obtains sovereignty by the assistance of the nobles
maintains himself with more difficulty than he who comes to it by the
aid of the people  because the former finds himself with many around
him who consider themselves his equals  and because of this he can
neither rule nor manage them to his liking  but he who reaches
sovereignty by popular favour finds himself alone  and has none around
him  or few  who are not prepared to obey him 

besides this  one cannot by fair dealing  and without injury to others 
satisfy the nobles  but you can satisfy the people  for their object is
more righteous than that of the nobles  the latter wishing to oppress 
while the former only desire not to be oppressed  it is to be added
also that a prince can never secure himself against a hostile people 
because of there being too many  whilst from the nobles he can secure
himself  as they are few in number  the worst that a prince may expect
from a hostile people is to be abandoned by them  but from hostile
nobles he has not only to fear abandonment  but also that they will
rise against him  for they  being in these affairs more far seeing and
astute  always come forward in time to save themselves  and to obtain
favours from him whom they expect to prevail  further  the prince is
compelled to live always with the same people  but he can do well
without the same nobles  being able to make and unmake them daily  and
to give or take away authority when it pleases him 

therefore  to make this point clearer  i say that the nobles ought to
be looked at mainly in two ways  that is to say  they either shape
their course in such a way as binds them entirely to your fortune  or
they do not  those who so bind themselves  and are not rapacious  ought
to be honoured and loved  those who do not bind themselves may be dealt
with in two ways  they may fail to do this through pusillanimity and a
natural want of courage  in which case you ought to make use of them 
especially of those who are of good counsel  and thus  whilst in
prosperity you honour them  in adversity you do not have to fear them 
but when for their own ambitious ends they shun binding themselves  it
is a token that they are giving more thought to themselves than to you 
and a prince ought to guard against such  and to fear them as if they
were open enemies  because in adversity they always help to ruin him 

therefore  one who becomes a prince through the favour of the people
ought to keep them friendly  and this he can easily do seeing they only
ask not to be oppressed by him  but one who  in opposition to the
people  becomes a prince by the favour of the nobles  ought  above
everything  to seek to win the people over to himself  and this he may
easily do if he takes them under his protection  because men  when they
receive good from him of whom they were expecting evil  are bound more
closely to their benefactor  thus the people quickly become more
devoted to him than if he had been raised to the principality by their
favours  and the prince can win their affections in many ways  but as
these vary according to the circumstances one cannot give fixed rules 
so i omit them  but  i repeat  it is necessary for a prince to have the
people friendly  otherwise he has no security in adversity 

nabis  1  prince of the spartans  sustained the attack of all greece 
and of a victorious roman army  and against them he defended his
country and his government  and for the overcoming of this peril it was
only necessary for him to make himself secure against a few  but this
would not have been sufficient had the people been hostile  and do not
let any one impugn this statement with the trite proverb that “he who
builds on the people  builds on the mud ” for this is true when a
private citizen makes a foundation there  and persuades himself that
the people will free him when he is oppressed by his enemies or by the
magistrates  wherein he would find himself very often deceived  as
happened to the gracchi in rome and to messer giorgio scali 2  in
florence  but granted a prince who has established himself as above 
who can command  and is a man of courage  undismayed in adversity  who
does not fail in other qualifications  and who  by his resolution and
energy  keeps the whole people encouraged—such a one will never find
himself deceived in them  and it will be shown that he has laid his
foundations well 

  1  nabis  tyrant of sparta  conquered by the romans under flamininus
 in 195 b c   killed 192 b c 

  2  messer giorgio scali  this event is to be found in machiavelli’s
 “florentine history ” book iii 

these principalities are liable to danger when they are passing from
the civil to the absolute order of government  for such princes either
rule personally or through magistrates  in the latter case their
government is weaker and more insecure  because it rests entirely on
the goodwill of those citizens who are raised to the magistracy  and
who  especially in troubled times  can destroy the government with
great ease  either by intrigue or open defiance  and the prince has not
the chance amid tumults to exercise absolute authority  because the
citizens and subjects  accustomed to receive orders from magistrates 
are not of a mind to obey him amid these confusions  and there will
always be in doubtful times a scarcity of men whom he can trust  for
such a prince cannot rely upon what he observes in quiet times  when
citizens have need of the state  because then every one agrees with
him  they all promise  and when death is far distant they all wish to
die for him  but in troubled times  when the state has need of its
citizens  then he finds but few  and so much the more is this
experiment dangerous  inasmuch as it can only be tried once  therefore
a wise prince ought to adopt such a course that his citizens will
always in every sort and kind of circumstance have need of the state
and of him  and then he will always find them faithful 




chapter x 
concerning the way in which the strength of all principalities ought to
be measured


it is necessary to consider another point in examining the character of
these principalities  that is  whether a prince has such power that  in
case of need  he can support himself with his own resources  or whether
he has always need of the assistance of others  and to make this quite
clear i say that i consider those who are able to support themselves by
their own resources who can  either by abundance of men or money  raise
a sufficient army to join battle against any one who comes to attack
them  and i consider those always to have need of others who cannot
show themselves against the enemy in the field  but are forced to
defend themselves by sheltering behind walls  the first case has been
discussed  but we will speak of it again should it recur  in the second
case one can say nothing except to encourage such princes to provision
and fortify their towns  and not on any account to defend the country 
and whoever shall fortify his town well  and shall have managed the
other concerns of his subjects in the way stated above  and to be often
repeated  will never be attacked without great caution  for men are
always adverse to enterprises where difficulties can be seen  and it
will be seen not to be an easy thing to attack one who has his town
well fortified  and is not hated by his people 

the cities of germany are absolutely free  they own but little country
around them  and they yield obedience to the emperor when it suits
them  nor do they fear this or any other power they may have near them 
because they are fortified in such a way that every one thinks the
taking of them by assault would be tedious and difficult  seeing they
have proper ditches and walls  they have sufficient artillery  and they
always keep in public depots enough for one year’s eating  drinking 
and firing  and beyond this  to keep the people quiet and without loss
to the state  they always have the means of giving work to the
community in those labours that are the life and strength of the city 
and on the pursuit of which the people are supported  they also hold
military exercises in repute  and moreover have many ordinances to
uphold them 

therefore  a prince who has a strong city  and had not made himself
odious  will not be attacked  or if any one should attack he will only
be driven off with disgrace  again  because that the affairs of this
world are so changeable  it is almost impossible to keep an army a
whole year in the field without being interfered with  and whoever
should reply  if the people have property outside the city  and see it
burnt  they will not remain patient  and the long siege and
self interest will make them forget their prince  to this i answer that
a powerful and courageous prince will overcome all such difficulties by
giving at one time hope to his subjects that the evil will not be for
long  at another time fear of the cruelty of the enemy  then preserving
himself adroitly from those subjects who seem to him to be too bold 

further  the enemy would naturally on his arrival at once burn and ruin
the country at the time when the spirits of the people are still hot
and ready for the defence  and  therefore  so much the less ought the
prince to hesitate  because after a time  when spirits have cooled  the
damage is already done  the ills are incurred  and there is no longer
any remedy  and therefore they are so much the more ready to unite with
their prince  he appearing to be under obligations to them now that
their houses have been burnt and their possessions ruined in his
defence  for it is the nature of men to be bound by the benefits they
confer as much as by those they receive  therefore  if everything is
well considered  it will not be difficult for a wise prince to keep the
minds of his citizens steadfast from first to last  when he does not
fail to support and defend them 




chapter xi 
concerning ecclesiastical principalities


it only remains now to speak of ecclesiastical principalities  touching
which all difficulties are prior to getting possession  because they
are acquired either by capacity or good fortune  and they can be held
without either  for they are sustained by the ancient ordinances of
religion  which are so all powerful  and of such a character that the
principalities may be held no matter how their princes behave and live 
these princes alone have states and do not defend them  and they have
subjects and do not rule them  and the states  although unguarded  are
not taken from them  and the subjects  although not ruled  do not care 
and they have neither the desire nor the ability to alienate
themselves  such principalities only are secure and happy  but being
upheld by powers  to which the human mind cannot reach  i shall speak
no more of them  because  being exalted and maintained by god  it would
be the act of a presumptuous and rash man to discuss them 

nevertheless  if any one should ask of me how comes it that the church
has attained such greatness in temporal power  seeing that from
alexander backwards the italian potentates (not only those who have
been called potentates  but every baron and lord  though the smallest)
have valued the temporal power very slightly—yet now a king of france
trembles before it  and it has been able to drive him from italy  and
to ruin the venetians—although this may be very manifest  it does not
appear to me superfluous to recall it in some measure to memory 

before charles  king of france  passed into italy  1  this country was
under the dominion of the pope  the venetians  the king of naples  the
duke of milan  and the florentines  these potentates had two principal
anxieties  the one  that no foreigner should enter italy under arms 
the other  that none of themselves should seize more territory  those
about whom there was the most anxiety were the pope and the venetians 
to restrain the venetians the union of all the others was necessary  as
it was for the defence of ferrara  and to keep down the pope they made
use of the barons of rome  who  being divided into two factions  orsini
and colonnesi  had always a pretext for disorder  and  standing with
arms in their hands under the eyes of the pontiff  kept the pontificate
weak and powerless  and although there might arise sometimes a
courageous pope  such as sixtus  yet neither fortune nor wisdom could
rid him of these annoyances  and the short life of a pope is also a
cause of weakness  for in the ten years  which is the average life of a
pope  he can with difficulty lower one of the factions  and if  so to
speak  one people should almost destroy the colonnesi  another would
arise hostile to the orsini  who would support their opponents  and yet
would not have time to ruin the orsini  this was the reason why the
temporal powers of the pope were little esteemed in italy 

  1  charles viii invaded italy in 1494 

alexander the sixth arose afterwards  who of all the pontiffs that have
ever been showed how a pope with both money and arms was able to
prevail  and through the instrumentality of the duke valentino  and by
reason of the entry of the french  he brought about all those things
which i have discussed above in the actions of the duke  and although
his intention was not to aggrandize the church  but the duke 
nevertheless  what he did contributed to the greatness of the church 
which  after his death and the ruin of the duke  became the heir to all
his labours 

pope julius came afterwards and found the church strong  possessing all
the romagna  the barons of rome reduced to impotence  and  through the
chastisements of alexander  the factions wiped out  he also found the
way open to accumulate money in a manner such as had never been
practised before alexander’s time  such things julius not only
followed  but improved upon  and he intended to gain bologna  to ruin
the venetians  and to drive the french out of italy  all of these
enterprises prospered with him  and so much the more to his credit 
inasmuch as he did everything to strengthen the church and not any
private person  he kept also the orsini and colonnesi factions within
the bounds in which he found them  and although there was among them
some mind to make disturbance  nevertheless he held two things firm 
the one  the greatness of the church  with which he terrified them  and
the other  not allowing them to have their own cardinals  who caused
the disorders among them  for whenever these factions have their
cardinals they do not remain quiet for long  because cardinals foster
the factions in rome and out of it  and the barons are compelled to
support them  and thus from the ambitions of prelates arise disorders
and tumults among the barons  for these reasons his holiness pope
leo 2  found the pontificate most powerful  and it is to be hoped that 
if others made it great in arms  he will make it still greater and more
venerated by his goodness and infinite other virtues 

  2  pope leo x was the cardinal de’ medici 




chapter xii 
how many kinds of soldiery there are  and concerning mercenaries


having discoursed particularly on the characteristics of such
principalities as in the beginning i proposed to discuss  and having
considered in some degree the causes of there being good or bad  and
having shown the methods by which many have sought to acquire them and
to hold them  it now remains for me to discuss generally the means of
offence and defence which belong to each of them 

we have seen above how necessary it is for a prince to have his
foundations well laid  otherwise it follows of necessity he will go to
ruin  the chief foundations of all states  new as well as old or
composite  are good laws and good arms  and as there cannot be good
laws where the state is not well armed  it follows that where they are
well armed they have good laws  i shall leave the laws out of the
discussion and shall speak of the arms 

i say  therefore  that the arms with which a prince defends his state
are either his own  or they are mercenaries  auxiliaries  or mixed 
mercenaries and auxiliaries are useless and dangerous  and if one holds
his state based on these arms  he will stand neither firm nor safe  for
they are disunited  ambitious  and without discipline  unfaithful 
valiant before friends  cowardly before enemies  they have neither the
fear of god nor fidelity to men  and destruction is deferred only so
long as the attack is  for in peace one is robbed by them  and in war
by the enemy  the fact is  they have no other attraction or reason for
keeping the field than a trifle of stipend  which is not sufficient to
make them willing to die for you  they are ready enough to be your
soldiers whilst you do not make war  but if war comes they take
themselves off or run from the foe  which i should have little trouble
to prove  for the ruin of italy has been caused by nothing else than by
resting all her hopes for many years on mercenaries  and although they
formerly made some display and appeared valiant amongst themselves  yet
when the foreigners came they showed what they were  thus it was that
charles  king of france  was allowed to seize italy with chalk in
hand  1  and he who told us that our sins were the cause of it told the
truth  but they were not the sins he imagined  but those which i have
related  and as they were the sins of princes  it is the princes who
have also suffered the penalty 

  1  “with chalk in hand ” “col gesso ” this is one of the  bons mots 
 of alexander vi  and refers to the ease with which charles viii seized
 italy  implying that it was only necessary for him to send his
 quartermasters to chalk up the billets for his soldiers to conquer the
 country   cf   “the history of henry vii ” by lord bacon  “king
 charles had conquered the realm of naples  and lost it again  in a
 kind of a felicity of a dream  he passed the whole length of italy
 without resistance  so that it was true what pope alexander was wont
 to say  that the frenchmen came into italy with chalk in their hands 
 to mark up their lodgings  rather than with swords to fight ”

i wish to demonstrate further the infelicity of these arms  the
mercenary captains are either capable men or they are not  if they are 
you cannot trust them  because they always aspire to their own
greatness  either by oppressing you  who are their master  or others
contrary to your intentions  but if the captain is not skilful  you are
ruined in the usual way 

and if it be urged that whoever is armed will act in the same way 
whether mercenary or not  i reply that when arms have to be resorted
to  either by a prince or a republic  then the prince ought to go in
person and perform the duty of a captain  the republic has to send its
citizens  and when one is sent who does not turn out satisfactorily  it
ought to recall him  and when one is worthy  to hold him by the laws so
that he does not leave the command  and experience has shown princes
and republics  single handed  making the greatest progress  and
mercenaries doing nothing except damage  and it is more difficult to
bring a republic  armed with its own arms  under the sway of one of its
citizens than it is to bring one armed with foreign arms  rome and
sparta stood for many ages armed and free  the switzers are completely
armed and quite free 

of ancient mercenaries  for example  there are the carthaginians  who
were oppressed by their mercenary soldiers after the first war with the
romans  although the carthaginians had their own citizens for captains 
after the death of epaminondas  philip of macedon was made captain of
their soldiers by the thebans  and after victory he took away their
liberty 

duke filippo being dead  the milanese enlisted francesco sforza against
the venetians  and he  having overcome the enemy at caravaggio  2 
allied himself with them to crush the milanese  his masters  his
father  sforza  having been engaged by queen johanna 3  of naples  left
her unprotected  so that she was forced to throw herself into the arms
of the king of aragon  in order to save her kingdom  and if the
venetians and florentines formerly extended their dominions by these
arms  and yet their captains did not make themselves princes  but have
defended them  i reply that the florentines in this case have been
favoured by chance  for of the able captains  of whom they might have
stood in fear  some have not conquered  some have been opposed  and
others have turned their ambitions elsewhere  one who did not conquer
was giovanni acuto  4  and since he did not conquer his fidelity cannot
be proved  but every one will acknowledge that  had he conquered  the
florentines would have stood at his discretion  sforza had the
bracceschi always against him  so they watched each other  francesco
turned his ambition to lombardy  braccio against the church and the
kingdom of naples  but let us come to that which happened a short while
ago  the florentines appointed as their captain pagolo vitelli  a most
prudent man  who from a private position had risen to the greatest
renown  if this man had taken pisa  nobody can deny that it would have
been proper for the florentines to keep in with him  for if he became
the soldier of their enemies they had no means of resisting  and if
they held to him they must obey him  the venetians  if their
achievements are considered  will be seen to have acted safely and
gloriously so long as they sent to war their own men  when with armed
gentlemen and plebians they did valiantly  this was before they turned
to enterprises on land  but when they began to fight on land they
forsook this virtue and followed the custom of italy  and in the
beginning of their expansion on land  through not having much
territory  and because of their great reputation  they had not much to
fear from their captains  but when they expanded  as under
carmignuola  5  they had a taste of this mistake  for  having found him
a most valiant man (they beat the duke of milan under his leadership) 
and  on the other hand  knowing how lukewarm he was in the war  they
feared they would no longer conquer under him  and for this reason they
were not willing  nor were they able  to let him go  and so  not to
lose again that which they had acquired  they were compelled  in order
to secure themselves  to murder him  they had afterwards for their
captains bartolomeo da bergamo  roberto da san severino  the count of
pitigliano  6  and the like  under whom they had to dread loss and not
gain  as happened afterwards at vaila  7  where in one battle they lost
that which in eight hundred years they had acquired with so much
trouble  because from such arms conquests come but slowly  long delayed
and inconsiderable  but the losses sudden and portentous 

  2  battle of caravaggio  15th september 1448 

  3  johanna ii of naples  the widow of ladislao  king of naples 

  4  giovanni acuto  an english knight whose name was sir john
 hawkwood  he fought in the english wars in france  and was knighted by
 edward iii  afterwards he collected a body of troops and went into
 italy  these became the famous “white company ” he took part in many
 wars  and died in florence in 1394  he was born about 1320 at sible
 hedingham  a village in essex  he married domnia  a daughter of
 bernabo visconti 

  5  carmignuola  francesco bussone  born at carmagnola about 1390 
 executed at venice  5th may 1432 

  6  bartolomeo colleoni of bergamo  died 1457  roberto of san
 severino  died fighting for venice against sigismund  duke of austria 
 in 1487  “primo capitano in italia ”—machiavelli  count of pitigliano 
 nicolo orsini  born 1442  died 1510 

  7  battle of vaila in 1509 

and as with these examples i have reached italy  which has been ruled
for many years by mercenaries  i wish to discuss them more seriously 
in order that  having seen their rise and progress  one may be better
prepared to counteract them  you must understand that the empire has
recently come to be repudiated in italy  that the pope has acquired
more temporal power  and that italy has been divided up into more
states  for the reason that many of the great cities took up arms
against their nobles  who  formerly favoured by the emperor  were
oppressing them  whilst the church was favouring them so as to gain
authority in temporal power  in many others their citizens became
princes  from this it came to pass that italy fell partly into the
hands of the church and of republics  and  the church consisting of
priests and the republic of citizens unaccustomed to arms  both
commenced to enlist foreigners 

the first who gave renown to this soldiery was alberigo da conio  8 
the romagnian  from the school of this man sprang  among others 
braccio and sforza  who in their time were the arbiters of italy  after
these came all the other captains who till now have directed the arms
of italy  and the end of all their valour has been  that she has been
overrun by charles  robbed by louis  ravaged by ferdinand  and insulted
by the switzers  the principle that has guided them has been  first  to
lower the credit of infantry so that they might increase their own 
they did this because  subsisting on their pay and without territory 
they were unable to support many soldiers  and a few infantry did not
give them any authority  so they were led to employ cavalry  with a
moderate force of which they were maintained and honoured  and affairs
were brought to such a pass that  in an army of twenty thousand
soldiers  there were not to be found two thousand foot soldiers  they
had  besides this  used every art to lessen fatigue and danger to
themselves and their soldiers  not killing in the fray  but taking
prisoners and liberating without ransom  they did not attack towns at
night  nor did the garrisons of the towns attack encampments at night 
they did not surround the camp either with stockade or ditch  nor did
they campaign in the winter  all these things were permitted by their
military rules  and devised by them to avoid  as i have said  both
fatigue and dangers  thus they have brought italy to slavery and
contempt 

  8  alberigo da conio  alberico da barbiano  count of cunio in
 romagna  he was the leader of the famous “company of st george ”
 composed entirely of italian soldiers  he died in 1409 




chapter xiii 
concerning auxiliaries  mixed soldiery  and one’s own


auxiliaries  which are the other useless arm  are employed when a
prince is called in with his forces to aid and defend  as was done by
pope julius in the most recent times  for he  having  in the enterprise
against ferrara  had poor proof of his mercenaries  turned to
auxiliaries  and stipulated with ferdinand  king of spain  1  for his
assistance with men and arms  these arms may be useful and good in
themselves  but for him who calls them in they are always
disadvantageous  for losing  one is undone  and winning  one is their
captive 

  1  ferdinand v (f  ii of aragon and sicily  f  iii of naples) 
 surnamed “the catholic ” born 1452  died 1516 

and although ancient histories may be full of examples  i do not wish
to leave this recent one of pope julius the second  the peril of which
cannot fail to be perceived  for he  wishing to get ferrara  threw
himself entirely into the hands of the foreigner  but his good fortune
brought about a third event  so that he did not reap the fruit of his
rash choice  because  having his auxiliaries routed at ravenna  and the
switzers having risen and driven out the conquerors (against all
expectation  both his and others)  it so came to pass that he did not
become prisoner to his enemies  they having fled  nor to his
auxiliaries  he having conquered by other arms than theirs 

the florentines  being entirely without arms  sent ten thousand
frenchmen to take pisa  whereby they ran more danger than at any other
time of their troubles 

the emperor of constantinople  2  to oppose his neighbours  sent ten
thousand turks into greece  who  on the war being finished  were not
willing to quit  this was the beginning of the servitude of greece to
the infidels 

  2  joannes cantacuzenus  born 1300  died 1383 

therefore  let him who has no desire to conquer make use of these arms 
for they are much more hazardous than mercenaries  because with them
the ruin is ready made  they are all united  all yield obedience to
others  but with mercenaries  when they have conquered  more time and
better opportunities are needed to injure you  they are not all of one
community  they are found and paid by you  and a third party  which you
have made their head  is not able all at once to assume enough
authority to injure you  in conclusion  in mercenaries dastardy is most
dangerous  in auxiliaries  valour  the wise prince  therefore  has
always avoided these arms and turned to his own  and has been willing
rather to lose with them than to conquer with the others  not deeming
that a real victory which is gained with the arms of others 

i shall never hesitate to cite cesare borgia and his actions  this duke
entered the romagna with auxiliaries  taking there only french
soldiers  and with them he captured imola and forli  but afterwards 
such forces not appearing to him reliable  he turned to mercenaries 
discerning less danger in them  and enlisted the orsini and vitelli 
whom presently  on handling and finding them doubtful  unfaithful  and
dangerous  he destroyed and turned to his own men  and the difference
between one and the other of these forces can easily be seen when one
considers the difference there was in the reputation of the duke  when
he had the french  when he had the orsini and vitelli  and when he
relied on his own soldiers  on whose fidelity he could always count and
found it ever increasing  he was never esteemed more highly than when
every one saw that he was complete master of his own forces 

i was not intending to go beyond italian and recent examples  but i am
unwilling to leave out hiero  the syracusan  he being one of those i
have named above  this man  as i have said  made head of the army by
the syracusans  soon found out that a mercenary soldiery  constituted
like our italian condottieri  was of no use  and it appearing to him
that he could neither keep them nor let them go  he had them all cut to
pieces  and afterwards made war with his own forces and not with
aliens 

i wish also to recall to memory an instance from the old testament
applicable to this subject  david offered himself to saul to fight with
goliath  the philistine champion  and  to give him courage  saul armed
him with his own weapons  which david rejected as soon as he had them
on his back  saying he could make no use of them  and that he wished to
meet the enemy with his sling and his knife  in conclusion  the arms of
others either fall from your back  or they weigh you down  or they bind
you fast 

charles the seventh  3  the father of king louis the eleventh  4 
having by good fortune and valour liberated france from the english 
recognized the necessity of being armed with forces of his own  and he
established in his kingdom ordinances concerning men at arms and
infantry  afterwards his son  king louis  abolished the infantry and
began to enlist the switzers  which mistake  followed by others  is  as
is now seen  a source of peril to that kingdom  because  having raised
the reputation of the switzers  he has entirely diminished the value of
his own arms  for he has destroyed the infantry altogether  and his
men at arms he has subordinated to others  for  being as they are so
accustomed to fight along with switzers  it does not appear that they
can now conquer without them  hence it arises that the french cannot
stand against the switzers  and without the switzers they do not come
off well against others  the armies of the french have thus become
mixed  partly mercenary and partly national  both of which arms
together are much better than mercenaries alone or auxiliaries alone 
but much inferior to one’s own forces  and this example proves it  for
the kingdom of france would be unconquerable if the ordinance of
charles had been enlarged or maintained 

  3  charles vii of france  surnamed “the victorious ” born 1403  died
 1461 

  4  louis xi  son of the above  born 1423  died 1483 

but the scanty wisdom of man  on entering into an affair which looks
well at first  cannot discern the poison that is hidden in it  as i
have said above of hectic fevers  therefore  if he who rules a
principality cannot recognize evils until they are upon him  he is not
truly wise  and this insight is given to few  and if the first disaster
to the roman empire 5  should be examined  it will be found to have
commenced only with the enlisting of the goths  because from that time
the vigour of the roman empire began to decline  and all that valour
which had raised it passed away to others 

  5  “many speakers to the house the other night in the debate on the
 reduction of armaments seemed to show a most lamentable ignorance of
 the conditions under which the british empire maintains its existence 
 when mr balfour replied to the allegations that the roman empire sank
 under the weight of its military obligations  he said that this was
 ‘wholly unhistorical ’ he might well have added that the roman power
 was at its zenith when every citizen acknowledged his liability to
 fight for the state  but that it began to decline as soon as this
 obligation was no longer recognised ”— pall mall gazette   15th may
 1906 

i conclude  therefore  that no principality is secure without having
its own forces  on the contrary  it is entirely dependent on good
fortune  not having the valour which in adversity would defend it  and
it has always been the opinion and judgment of wise men that nothing
can be so uncertain or unstable as fame or power not founded on its own
strength  and one’s own forces are those which are composed either of
subjects  citizens  or dependents  all others are mercenaries or
auxiliaries  and the way to make ready one’s own forces will be easily
found if the rules suggested by me shall be reflected upon  and if one
will consider how philip  the father of alexander the great  and many
republics and princes have armed and organized themselves  to which
rules i entirely commit myself 




chapter xiv 
that which concerns a prince on the subject of the art of war


a prince ought to have no other aim or thought  nor select anything
else for his study  than war and its rules and discipline  for this is
the sole art that belongs to him who rules  and it is of such force
that it not only upholds those who are born princes  but it often
enables men to rise from a private station to that rank  and  on the
contrary  it is seen that when princes have thought more of ease than
of arms they have lost their states  and the first cause of your losing
it is to neglect this art  and what enables you to acquire a state is
to be master of the art  francesco sforza  through being martial  from
a private person became duke of milan  and the sons  through avoiding
the hardships and troubles of arms  from dukes became private persons 
for among other evils which being unarmed brings you  it causes you to
be despised  and this is one of those ignominies against which a prince
ought to guard himself  as is shown later on  because there is nothing
proportionate between the armed and the unarmed  and it is not
reasonable that he who is armed should yield obedience willingly to him
who is unarmed  or that the unarmed man should be secure among armed
servants  because  there being in the one disdain and in the other
suspicion  it is not possible for them to work well together  and
therefore a prince who does not understand the art of war  over and
above the other misfortunes already mentioned  cannot be respected by
his soldiers  nor can he rely on them  he ought never  therefore  to
have out of his thoughts this subject of war  and in peace he should
addict himself more to its exercise than in war  this he can do in two
ways  the one by action  the other by study 

as regards action  he ought above all things to keep his men well
organized and drilled  to follow incessantly the chase  by which he
accustoms his body to hardships  and learns something of the nature of
localities  and gets to find out how the mountains rise  how the
valleys open out  how the plains lie  and to understand the nature of
rivers and marshes  and in all this to take the greatest care  which
knowledge is useful in two ways  firstly  he learns to know his
country  and is better able to undertake its defence  afterwards  by
means of the knowledge and observation of that locality  he understands
with ease any other which it may be necessary for him to study
hereafter  because the hills  valleys  and plains  and rivers and
marshes that are  for instance  in tuscany  have a certain resemblance
to those of other countries  so that with a knowledge of the aspect of
one country one can easily arrive at a knowledge of others  and the
prince that lacks this skill lacks the essential which it is desirable
that a captain should possess  for it teaches him to surprise his
enemy  to select quarters  to lead armies  to array the battle  to
besiege towns to advantage 

philopoemen  1  prince of the achaeans  among other praises which
writers have bestowed on him  is commended because in time of peace he
never had anything in his mind but the rules of war  and when he was in
the country with friends  he often stopped and reasoned with them  “if
the enemy should be upon that hill  and we should find ourselves here
with our army  with whom would be the advantage? how should one best
advance to meet him  keeping the ranks? if we should wish to retreat 
how ought we to pursue?” and he would set forth to them  as he went 
all the chances that could befall an army  he would listen to their
opinion and state his  confirming it with reasons  so that by these
continual discussions there could never arise  in time of war  any
unexpected circumstances that he could not deal with 

  1  philopoemen  “the last of the greeks ” born 252 b c   died 183
 b c 

but to exercise the intellect the prince should read histories  and
study there the actions of illustrious men  to see how they have borne
themselves in war  to examine the causes of their victories and defeat 
so as to avoid the latter and imitate the former  and above all do as
an illustrious man did  who took as an exemplar one who had been
praised and famous before him  and whose achievements and deeds he
always kept in his mind  as it is said alexander the great imitated
achilles  caesar alexander  scipio cyrus  and whoever reads the life of
cyrus  written by xenophon  will recognize afterwards in the life of
scipio how that imitation was his glory  and how in chastity 
affability  humanity  and liberality scipio conformed to those things
which have been written of cyrus by xenophon  a wise prince ought to
observe some such rules  and never in peaceful times stand idle  but
increase his resources with industry in such a way that they may be
available to him in adversity  so that if fortune chances it may find
him prepared to resist her blows 




chapter xv 
concerning things for which men  and especially princes  are praised or
blamed


it remains now to see what ought to be the rules of conduct for a
prince towards subject and friends  and as i know that many have
written on this point  i expect i shall be considered presumptuous in
mentioning it again  especially as in discussing it i shall depart from
the methods of other people  but  it being my intention to write a
thing which shall be useful to him who apprehends it  it appears to me
more appropriate to follow up the real truth of the matter than the
imagination of it  for many have pictured republics and principalities
which in fact have never been known or seen  because how one lives is
so far distant from how one ought to live  that he who neglects what is
done for what ought to be done  sooner effects his ruin than his
preservation  for a man who wishes to act entirely up to his
professions of virtue soon meets with what destroys him among so much
that is evil 

hence it is necessary for a prince wishing to hold his own to know how
to do wrong  and to make use of it or not according to necessity 
therefore  putting on one side imaginary things concerning a prince 
and discussing those which are real  i say that all men when they are
spoken of  and chiefly princes for being more highly placed  are
remarkable for some of those qualities which bring them either blame or
praise  and thus it is that one is reputed liberal  another miserly 
using a tuscan term (because an avaricious person in our language is
still he who desires to possess by robbery  whilst we call one miserly
who deprives himself too much of the use of his own)  one is reputed
generous  one rapacious  one cruel  one compassionate  one faithless 
another faithful  one effeminate and cowardly  another bold and brave 
one affable  another haughty  one lascivious  another chaste  one
sincere  another cunning  one hard  another easy  one grave  another
frivolous  one religious  another unbelieving  and the like  and i know
that every one will confess that it would be most praiseworthy in a
prince to exhibit all the above qualities that are considered good  but
because they can neither be entirely possessed nor observed  for human
conditions do not permit it  it is necessary for him to be sufficiently
prudent that he may know how to avoid the reproach of those vices which
would lose him his state  and also to keep himself  if it be possible 
from those which would not lose him it  but this not being possible  he
may with less hesitation abandon himself to them  and again  he need
not make himself uneasy at incurring a reproach for those vices without
which the state can only be saved with difficulty  for if everything is
considered carefully  it will be found that something which looks like
virtue  if followed  would be his ruin  whilst something else  which
looks like vice  yet followed brings him security and prosperity 




chapter xvi 
concerning liberality and meanness


commencing then with the first of the above named characteristics  i
say that it would be well to be reputed liberal  nevertheless 
liberality exercised in a way that does not bring you the reputation
for it  injures you  for if one exercises it honestly and as it should
be exercised  it may not become known  and you will not avoid the
reproach of its opposite  therefore  any one wishing to maintain among
men the name of liberal is obliged to avoid no attribute of
magnificence  so that a prince thus inclined will consume in such acts
all his property  and will be compelled in the end  if he wish to
maintain the name of liberal  to unduly weigh down his people  and tax
them  and do everything he can to get money  this will soon make him
odious to his subjects  and becoming poor he will be little valued by
any one  thus  with his liberality  having offended many and rewarded
few  he is affected by the very first trouble and imperilled by
whatever may be the first danger  recognizing this himself  and wishing
to draw back from it  he runs at once into the reproach of being
miserly 

therefore  a prince  not being able to exercise this virtue of
liberality in such a way that it is recognized  except to his cost  if
he is wise he ought not to fear the reputation of being mean  for in
time he will come to be more considered than if liberal  seeing that
with his economy his revenues are enough  that he can defend himself
against all attacks  and is able to engage in enterprises without
burdening his people  thus it comes to pass that he exercises
liberality towards all from whom he does not take  who are numberless 
and meanness towards those to whom he does not give  who are few 

we have not seen great things done in our time except by those who have
been considered mean  the rest have failed  pope julius the second was
assisted in reaching the papacy by a reputation for liberality  yet he
did not strive afterwards to keep it up  when he made war on the king
of france  and he made many wars without imposing any extraordinary tax
on his subjects  for he supplied his additional expenses out of his
long thriftiness  the present king of spain would not have undertaken
or conquered in so many enterprises if he had been reputed liberal  a
prince  therefore  provided that he has not to rob his subjects  that
he can defend himself  that he does not become poor and abject  that he
is not forced to become rapacious  ought to hold of little account a
reputation for being mean  for it is one of those vices which will
enable him to govern 

and if any one should say  caesar obtained empire by liberality  and
many others have reached the highest positions by having been liberal 
and by being considered so  i answer  either you are a prince in fact 
or in a way to become one  in the first case this liberality is
dangerous  in the second it is very necessary to be considered liberal 
and caesar was one of those who wished to become pre eminent in rome 
but if he had survived after becoming so  and had not moderated his
expenses  he would have destroyed his government  and if any one should
reply  many have been princes  and have done great things with armies 
who have been considered very liberal  i reply  either a prince spends
that which is his own or his subjects’ or else that of others  in the
first case he ought to be sparing  in the second he ought not to
neglect any opportunity for liberality  and to the prince who goes
forth with his army  supporting it by pillage  sack  and extortion 
handling that which belongs to others  this liberality is necessary 
otherwise he would not be followed by soldiers  and of that which is
neither yours nor your subjects’ you can be a ready giver  as were
cyrus  caesar  and alexander  because it does not take away your
reputation if you squander that of others  but adds to it  it is only
squandering your own that injures you 

and there is nothing wastes so rapidly as liberality  for even whilst
you exercise it you lose the power to do so  and so become either poor
or despised  or else  in avoiding poverty  rapacious and hated  and a
prince should guard himself  above all things  against being despised
and hated  and liberality leads you to both  therefore it is wiser to
have a reputation for meanness which brings reproach without hatred 
than to be compelled through seeking a reputation for liberality to
incur a name for rapacity which begets reproach with hatred 




chapter xvii 
concerning cruelty and clemency  and whether it is better to be loved
than feared


coming now to the other qualities mentioned above  i say that every
prince ought to desire to be considered clement and not cruel 
nevertheless he ought to take care not to misuse this clemency  cesare
borgia was considered cruel  notwithstanding  his cruelty reconciled
the romagna  unified it  and restored it to peace and loyalty  and if
this be rightly considered  he will be seen to have been much more
merciful than the florentine people  who  to avoid a reputation for
cruelty  permitted pistoia to be destroyed  1  therefore a prince  so
long as he keeps his subjects united and loyal  ought not to mind the
reproach of cruelty  because with a few examples he will be more
merciful than those who  through too much mercy  allow disorders to
arise  from which follow murders or robberies  for these are wont to
injure the whole people  whilst those executions which originate with a
prince offend the individual only 

  1  during the rioting between the cancellieri and panciatichi
 factions in 1502 and 1503 

and of all princes  it is impossible for the new prince to avoid the
imputation of cruelty  owing to new states being full of dangers  hence
virgil  through the mouth of dido  excuses the inhumanity of her reign
owing to its being new  saying 

“res dura  et regni novitas me talia cogunt
moliri  et late fines custode tueri ” 2 

nevertheless he ought to be slow to believe and to act  nor should he
himself show fear  but proceed in a temperate manner with prudence and
humanity  so that too much confidence may not make him incautious and
too much distrust render him intolerable 

  2        against my will  my fate
a throne unsettled  and an infant state 
bid me defend my realms with all my pow’rs 
and guard with these severities my shores 

christopher pitt 

upon this a question arises  whether it be better to be loved than
feared or feared than loved? it may be answered that one should wish to
be both  but  because it is difficult to unite them in one person  it
is much safer to be feared than loved  when  of the two  either must be
dispensed with  because this is to be asserted in general of men  that
they are ungrateful  fickle  false  cowardly  covetous  and as long as
you succeed they are yours entirely  they will offer you their blood 
property  life  and children  as is said above  when the need is far
distant  but when it approaches they turn against you  and that prince
who  relying entirely on their promises  has neglected other
precautions  is ruined  because friendships that are obtained by
payments  and not by greatness or nobility of mind  may indeed be
earned  but they are not secured  and in time of need cannot be relied
upon  and men have less scruple in offending one who is beloved than
one who is feared  for love is preserved by the link of obligation
which  owing to the baseness of men  is broken at every opportunity for
their advantage  but fear preserves you by a dread of punishment which
never fails 

nevertheless a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that  if he
does not win love  he avoids hatred  because he can endure very well
being feared whilst he is not hated  which will always be as long as he
abstains from the property of his citizens and subjects and from their
women  but when it is necessary for him to proceed against the life of
someone  he must do it on proper justification and for manifest cause 
but above all things he must keep his hands off the property of others 
because men more quickly forget the death of their father than the loss
of their patrimony  besides  pretexts for taking away the property are
never wanting  for he who has once begun to live by robbery will always
find pretexts for seizing what belongs to others  but reasons for
taking life  on the contrary  are more difficult to find and sooner
lapse  but when a prince is with his army  and has under control a
multitude of soldiers  then it is quite necessary for him to disregard
the reputation of cruelty  for without it he would never hold his army
united or disposed to its duties 

among the wonderful deeds of hannibal this one is enumerated  that
having led an enormous army  composed of many various races of men  to
fight in foreign lands  no dissensions arose either among them or
against the prince  whether in his bad or in his good fortune  this
arose from nothing else than his inhuman cruelty  which  with his
boundless valour  made him revered and terrible in the sight of his
soldiers  but without that cruelty  his other virtues were not
sufficient to produce this effect  and short sighted writers admire his
deeds from one point of view and from another condemn the principal
cause of them  that it is true his other virtues would not have been
sufficient for him may be proved by the case of scipio  that most
excellent man  not only of his own times but within the memory of man 
against whom  nevertheless  his army rebelled in spain  this arose from
nothing but his too great forbearance  which gave his soldiers more
license than is consistent with military discipline  for this he was
upbraided in the senate by fabius maximus  and called the corrupter of
the roman soldiery  the locrians were laid waste by a legate of scipio 
yet they were not avenged by him  nor was the insolence of the legate
punished  owing entirely to his easy nature  insomuch that someone in
the senate  wishing to excuse him  said there were many men who knew
much better how not to err than to correct the errors of others  this
disposition  if he had been continued in the command  would have
destroyed in time the fame and glory of scipio  but  he being under the
control of the senate  this injurious characteristic not only concealed
itself  but contributed to his glory 

returning to the question of being feared or loved  i come to the
conclusion that  men loving according to their own will and fearing
according to that of the prince  a wise prince should establish himself
on that which is in his own control and not in that of others  he must
endeavour only to avoid hatred  as is noted 




chapter xviii  1 
concerning the way in which princes should keep faith


  1  “the present chapter has given greater offence than any other
 portion of machiavelli’s writings ” burd  “il principe ” p  297 

every one admits how praiseworthy it is in a prince to keep faith  and
to live with integrity and not with craft  nevertheless our experience
has been that those princes who have done great things have held good
faith of little account  and have known how to circumvent the intellect
of men by craft  and in the end have overcome those who have relied on
their word  you must know there are two ways of contesting  2  the one
by the law  the other by force  the first method is proper to men  the
second to beasts  but because the first is frequently not sufficient 
it is necessary to have recourse to the second  therefore it is
necessary for a prince to understand how to avail himself of the beast
and the man  this has been figuratively taught to princes by ancient
writers  who describe how achilles and many other princes of old were
given to the centaur chiron to nurse  who brought them up in his
discipline  which means solely that  as they had for a teacher one who
was half beast and half man  so it is necessary for a prince to know
how to make use of both natures  and that one without the other is not
durable  a prince  therefore  being compelled knowingly to adopt the
beast  ought to choose the fox and the lion  because the lion cannot
defend himself against snares and the fox cannot defend himself against
wolves  therefore  it is necessary to be a fox to discover the snares
and a lion to terrify the wolves  those who rely simply on the lion do
not understand what they are about  therefore a wise lord cannot  nor
ought he to  keep faith when such observance may be turned against him 
and when the reasons that caused him to pledge it exist no longer  if
men were entirely good this precept would not hold  but because they
are bad  and will not keep faith with you  you too are not bound to
observe it with them  nor will there ever be wanting to a prince
legitimate reasons to excuse this non observance  of this endless
modern examples could be given  showing how many treaties and
engagements have been made void and of no effect through the
faithlessness of princes  and he who has known best how to employ the
fox has succeeded best 

  2  “contesting ”  i e   “striving for mastery ” mr burd points out
 that this passage is imitated directly from cicero’s “de officiis” 
 “nam cum sint duo genera decertandi  unum per disceptationem  alterum
 per vim  cumque illud proprium sit hominis  hoc beluarum  confugiendum
 est ad posterius  si uti non licet superiore ”

but it is necessary to know well how to disguise this characteristic 
and to be a great pretender and dissembler  and men are so simple  and
so subject to present necessities  that he who seeks to deceive will
always find someone who will allow himself to be deceived  one recent
example i cannot pass over in silence  alexander the sixth did nothing
else but deceive men  nor ever thought of doing otherwise  and he
always found victims  for there never was a man who had greater power
in asserting  or who with greater oaths would affirm a thing  yet would
observe it less  nevertheless his deceits always succeeded according to
his wishes  3  because he well understood this side of mankind 

  3  “nondimanco sempre gli succederono gli inganni (ad votum) ” the
 words “ad votum” are omitted in the testina addition  1550 

alexander never did what he said 
cesare never said what he did 

italian proverb 

therefore it is unnecessary for a prince to have all the good qualities
i have enumerated  but it is very necessary to appear to have them  and
i shall dare to say this also  that to have them and always to observe
them is injurious  and that to appear to have them is useful  to appear
merciful  faithful  humane  religious  upright  and to be so  but with
a mind so framed that should you require not to be so  you may be able
and know how to change to the opposite 

and you have to understand this  that a prince  especially a new one 
cannot observe all those things for which men are esteemed  being often
forced  in order to maintain the state  to act contrary to fidelity  4 
friendship  humanity  and religion  therefore it is necessary for him
to have a mind ready to turn itself accordingly as the winds and
variations of fortune force it  yet  as i have said above  not to
diverge from the good if he can avoid doing so  but  if compelled  then
to know how to set about it 

  4  “contrary to fidelity” or “faith ” “contro alla fede ” and “tutto
 fede ” “altogether faithful ” in the next paragraph  it is noteworthy
 that these two phrases  “contro alla fede” and “tutto fede ” were
 omitted in the testina edition  which was published with the sanction
 of the papal authorities  it may be that the meaning attached to the
 word “fede” was “the faith ”  i e   the catholic creed  and not as
 rendered here “fidelity” and “faithful ” observe that the word
 “religione” was suffered to stand in the text of the testina  being
 used to signify indifferently every shade of belief  as witness “the
 religion ” a phrase inevitably employed to designate the huguenot
 heresy  south in his sermon ix  p  69  ed  1843  comments on this
 passage as follows  “that great patron and coryphaeus of this tribe 
 nicolo machiavel  laid down this for a master rule in his political
 scheme  ‘that the show of religion was helpful to the politician  but
 the reality of it hurtful and pernicious ’”

for this reason a prince ought to take care that he never lets anything
slip from his lips that is not replete with the above named five
qualities  that he may appear to him who sees and hears him altogether
merciful  faithful  humane  upright  and religious  there is nothing
more necessary to appear to have than this last quality  inasmuch as
men judge generally more by the eye than by the hand  because it
belongs to everybody to see you  to few to come in touch with you 
every one sees what you appear to be  few really know what you are  and
those few dare not oppose themselves to the opinion of the many  who
have the majesty of the state to defend them  and in the actions of all
men  and especially of princes  which it is not prudent to challenge 
one judges by the result 

for that reason  let a prince have the credit of conquering and holding
his state  the means will always be considered honest  and he will be
praised by everybody  because the vulgar are always taken by what a
thing seems to be and by what comes of it  and in the world there are
only the vulgar  for the few find a place there only when the many have
no ground to rest on 

one prince 5  of the present time  whom it is not well to name  never
preaches anything else but peace and good faith  and to both he is most
hostile  and either  if he had kept it  would have deprived him of
reputation and kingdom many a time 

  5  ferdinand of aragon  “when machiavelli was writing  the prince  it
 would have been clearly impossible to mention ferdinand’s name here
 without giving offence ” burd’s “il principe ” p  308 




chapter xix 
that one should avoid being despised and hated


now  concerning the characteristics of which mention is made above  i
have spoken of the more important ones  the others i wish to discuss
briefly under this generality  that the prince must consider  as has
been in part said before  how to avoid those things which will make him
hated or contemptible  and as often as he shall have succeeded he will
have fulfilled his part  and he need not fear any danger in other
reproaches 

it makes him hated above all things  as i have said  to be rapacious 
and to be a violator of the property and women of his subjects  from
both of which he must abstain  and when neither their property nor
their honor is touched  the majority of men live content  and he has
only to contend with the ambition of a few  whom he can curb with ease
in many ways 

it makes him contemptible to be considered fickle  frivolous 
effeminate  mean spirited  irresolute  from all of which a prince
should guard himself as from a rock  and he should endeavour to show in
his actions greatness  courage  gravity  and fortitude  and in his
private dealings with his subjects let him show that his judgments are
irrevocable  and maintain himself in such reputation that no one can
hope either to deceive him or to get round him 

that prince is highly esteemed who conveys this impression of himself 
and he who is highly esteemed is not easily conspired against  for 
provided it is well known that he is an excellent man and revered by
his people  he can only be attacked with difficulty  for this reason a
prince ought to have two fears  one from within  on account of his
subjects  the other from without  on account of external powers  from
the latter he is defended by being well armed and having good allies 
and if he is well armed he will have good friends  and affairs will
always remain quiet within when they are quiet without  unless they
should have been already disturbed by conspiracy  and even should
affairs outside be disturbed  if he has carried out his preparations
and has lived as i have said  as long as he does not despair  he will
resist every attack  as i said nabis the spartan did 

but concerning his subjects  when affairs outside are disturbed he has
only to fear that they will conspire secretly  from which a prince can
easily secure himself by avoiding being hated and despised  and by
keeping the people satisfied with him  which it is most necessary for
him to accomplish  as i said above at length  and one of the most
efficacious remedies that a prince can have against conspiracies is not
to be hated and despised by the people  for he who conspires against a
prince always expects to please them by his removal  but when the
conspirator can only look forward to offending them  he will not have
the courage to take such a course  for the difficulties that confront a
conspirator are infinite  and as experience shows  many have been the
conspiracies  but few have been successful  because he who conspires
cannot act alone  nor can he take a companion except from those whom he
believes to be malcontents  and as soon as you have opened your mind to
a malcontent you have given him the material with which to content
himself  for by denouncing you he can look for every advantage  so
that  seeing the gain from this course to be assured  and seeing the
other to be doubtful and full of dangers  he must be a very rare
friend  or a thoroughly obstinate enemy of the prince  to keep faith
with you 

and  to reduce the matter into a small compass  i say that  on the side
of the conspirator  there is nothing but fear  jealousy  prospect of
punishment to terrify him  but on the side of the prince there is the
majesty of the principality  the laws  the protection of friends and
the state to defend him  so that  adding to all these things the
popular goodwill  it is impossible that any one should be so rash as to
conspire  for whereas in general the conspirator has to fear before the
execution of his plot  in this case he has also to fear the sequel to
the crime  because on account of it he has the people for an enemy  and
thus cannot hope for any escape 

endless examples could be given on this subject  but i will be content
with one  brought to pass within the memory of our fathers  messer
annibale bentivogli  who was prince in bologna (grandfather of the
present annibale)  having been murdered by the canneschi  who had
conspired against him  not one of his family survived but messer
giovanni  1  who was in childhood  immediately after his assassination
the people rose and murdered all the canneschi  this sprung from the
popular goodwill which the house of bentivogli enjoyed in those days in
bologna  which was so great that  although none remained there after
the death of annibale who was able to rule the state  the bolognese 
having information that there was one of the bentivogli family in
florence  who up to that time had been considered the son of a
blacksmith  sent to florence for him and gave him the government of
their city  and it was ruled by him until messer giovanni came in due
course to the government 

  1  giovanni bentivogli  born in bologna 1438  died at milan 1508  he
 ruled bologna from 1462 to 1506  machiavelli’s strong condemnation of
 conspiracies may get its edge from his own very recent experience
 (february 1513)  when he had been arrested and tortured for his
 alleged complicity in the boscoli conspiracy 

for this reason i consider that a prince ought to reckon conspiracies
of little account when his people hold him in esteem  but when it is
hostile to him  and bears hatred towards him  he ought to fear
everything and everybody  and well ordered states and wise princes have
taken every care not to drive the nobles to desperation  and to keep
the people satisfied and contented  for this is one of the most
important objects a prince can have 

among the best ordered and governed kingdoms of our times is france 
and in it are found many good institutions on which depend the liberty
and security of the king  of these the first is the parliament and its
authority  because he who founded the kingdom  knowing the ambition of
the nobility and their boldness  considered that a bit to their mouths
would be necessary to hold them in  and  on the other side  knowing the
hatred of the people  founded in fear  against the nobles  he wished to
protect them  yet he was not anxious for this to be the particular care
of the king  therefore  to take away the reproach which he would be
liable to from the nobles for favouring the people  and from the people
for favouring the nobles  he set up an arbiter  who should be one who
could beat down the great and favour the lesser without reproach to the
king  neither could you have a better or a more prudent arrangement  or
a greater source of security to the king and kingdom  from this one can
draw another important conclusion  that princes ought to leave affairs
of reproach to the management of others  and keep those of grace in
their own hands  and further  i consider that a prince ought to cherish
the nobles  but not so as to make himself hated by the people 

it may appear  perhaps  to some who have examined the lives and deaths
of the roman emperors that many of them would be an example contrary to
my opinion  seeing that some of them lived nobly and showed great
qualities of soul  nevertheless they have lost their empire or have
been killed by subjects who have conspired against them  wishing 
therefore  to answer these objections  i will recall the characters of
some of the emperors  and will show that the causes of their ruin were
not different to those alleged by me  at the same time i will only
submit for consideration those things that are noteworthy to him who
studies the affairs of those times 

it seems to me sufficient to take all those emperors who succeeded to
the empire from marcus the philosopher down to maximinus  they were
marcus and his son commodus  pertinax  julian  severus and his son
antoninus caracalla  macrinus  heliogabalus  alexander  and maximinus 

there is first to note that  whereas in other principalities the
ambition of the nobles and the insolence of the people only have to be
contended with  the roman emperors had a third difficulty in having to
put up with the cruelty and avarice of their soldiers  a matter so
beset with difficulties that it was the ruin of many  for it was a hard
thing to give satisfaction both to soldiers and people  because the
people loved peace  and for this reason they loved the unaspiring
prince  whilst the soldiers loved the warlike prince who was bold 
cruel  and rapacious  which qualities they were quite willing he should
exercise upon the people  so that they could get double pay and give
vent to their own greed and cruelty  hence it arose that those emperors
were always overthrown who  either by birth or training  had no great
authority  and most of them  especially those who came new to the
principality  recognizing the difficulty of these two opposing humours 
were inclined to give satisfaction to the soldiers  caring little about
injuring the people  which course was necessary  because  as princes
cannot help being hated by someone  they ought  in the first place  to
avoid being hated by every one  and when they cannot compass this  they
ought to endeavour with the utmost diligence to avoid the hatred of the
most powerful  therefore  those emperors who through inexperience had
need of special favour adhered more readily to the soldiers than to the
people  a course which turned out advantageous to them or not 
accordingly as the prince knew how to maintain authority over them 

from these causes it arose that marcus  pertinax  and alexander  being
all men of modest life  lovers of justice  enemies to cruelty  humane 
and benignant  came to a sad end except marcus  he alone lived and died
honoured  because he had succeeded to the throne by hereditary title 
and owed nothing either to the soldiers or the people  and afterwards 
being possessed of many virtues which made him respected  he always
kept both orders in their places whilst he lived  and was neither hated
nor despised 

but pertinax was created emperor against the wishes of the soldiers 
who  being accustomed to live licentiously under commodus  could not
endure the honest life to which pertinax wished to reduce them  thus 
having given cause for hatred  to which hatred there was added contempt
for his old age  he was overthrown at the very beginning of his
administration  and here it should be noted that hatred is acquired as
much by good works as by bad ones  therefore  as i said before  a
prince wishing to keep his state is very often forced to do evil  for
when that body is corrupt whom you think you have need of to maintain
yourself—it may be either the people or the soldiers or the nobles—you
have to submit to its humours and to gratify them  and then good works
will do you harm 

but let us come to alexander  who was a man of such great goodness 
that among the other praises which are accorded him is this  that in
the fourteen years he held the empire no one was ever put to death by
him unjudged  nevertheless  being considered effeminate and a man who
allowed himself to be governed by his mother  he became despised  the
army conspired against him  and murdered him 

turning now to the opposite characters of commodus  severus  antoninus
caracalla  and maximinus  you will find them all cruel and
rapacious men who  to satisfy their soldiers  did not hesitate to
commit every kind of iniquity against the people  and all  except
severus  came to a bad end  but in severus there was so much valour
that  keeping the soldiers friendly  although the people were oppressed
by him  he reigned successfully  for his valour made him so much
admired in the sight of the soldiers and people that the latter were
kept in a way astonished and awed and the former respectful and
satisfied  and because the actions of this man  as a new prince  were
great  i wish to show briefly that he knew well how to counterfeit the
fox and the lion  which natures  as i said above  it is necessary for a
prince to imitate 

knowing the sloth of the emperor julian  he persuaded the army in
sclavonia  of which he was captain  that it would be right to go to
rome and avenge the death of pertinax  who had been killed by the
praetorian soldiers  and under this pretext  without appearing to
aspire to the throne  he moved the army on rome  and reached italy
before it was known that he had started  on his arrival at rome  the
senate  through fear  elected him emperor and killed julian  after this
there remained for severus  who wished to make himself master of the
whole empire  two difficulties  one in asia  where niger  head of the
asiatic army  had caused himself to be proclaimed emperor  the other in
the west where albinus was  who also aspired to the throne  and as he
considered it dangerous to declare himself hostile to both  he decided
to attack niger and to deceive albinus  to the latter he wrote that 
being elected emperor by the senate  he was willing to share that
dignity with him and sent him the title of caesar  and  moreover  that
the senate had made albinus his colleague  which things were accepted
by albinus as true  but after severus had conquered and killed niger 
and settled oriental affairs  he returned to rome and complained to the
senate that albinus  little recognizing the benefits that he had
received from him  had by treachery sought to murder him  and for this
ingratitude he was compelled to punish him  afterwards he sought him
out in france  and took from him his government and life  he who will 
therefore  carefully examine the actions of this man will find him a
most valiant lion and a most cunning fox  he will find him feared and
respected by every one  and not hated by the army  and it need not be
wondered at that he  a new man  was able to hold the empire so well 
because his supreme renown always protected him from that hatred which
the people might have conceived against him for his violence 

but his son antoninus was a most eminent man  and had very excellent
qualities  which made him admirable in the sight of the people and
acceptable to the soldiers  for he was a warlike man  most enduring of
fatigue  a despiser of all delicate food and other luxuries  which
caused him to be beloved by the armies  nevertheless  his ferocity and
cruelties were so great and so unheard of that  after endless single
murders  he killed a large number of the people of rome and all those
of alexandria  he became hated by the whole world  and also feared by
those he had around him  to such an extent that he was murdered in the
midst of his army by a centurion  and here it must be noted that
such like deaths  which are deliberately inflicted with a resolved and
desperate courage  cannot be avoided by princes  because any one who
does not fear to die can inflict them  but a prince may fear them the
less because they are very rare  he has only to be careful not to do
any grave injury to those whom he employs or has around him in the
service of the state  antoninus had not taken this care  but had
contumeliously killed a brother of that centurion  whom also he daily
threatened  yet retained in his bodyguard  which  as it turned out  was
a rash thing to do  and proved the emperor’s ruin 

but let us come to commodus  to whom it should have been very easy to
hold the empire  for  being the son of marcus  he had inherited it  and
he had only to follow in the footsteps of his father to please his
people and soldiers  but  being by nature cruel and brutal  he gave
himself up to amusing the soldiers and corrupting them  so that he
might indulge his rapacity upon the people  on the other hand  not
maintaining his dignity  often descending to the theatre to compete
with gladiators  and doing other vile things  little worthy of the
imperial majesty  he fell into contempt with the soldiers  and being
hated by one party and despised by the other  he was conspired against
and was killed 

it remains to discuss the character of maximinus  he was a very warlike
man  and the armies  being disgusted with the effeminacy of alexander 
of whom i have already spoken  killed him and elected maximinus to the
throne  this he did not possess for long  for two things made him hated
and despised  the one  his having kept sheep in thrace  which brought
him into contempt (it being well known to all  and considered a great
indignity by every one)  and the other  his having at the accession to
his dominions deferred going to rome and taking possession of the
imperial seat  he had also gained a reputation for the utmost ferocity
by having  through his prefects in rome and elsewhere in the empire 
practised many cruelties  so that the whole world was moved to anger at
the meanness of his birth and to fear at his barbarity  first africa
rebelled  then the senate with all the people of rome  and all italy
conspired against him  to which may be added his own army  this latter 
besieging aquileia and meeting with difficulties in taking it  were
disgusted with his cruelties  and fearing him less when they found so
many against him  murdered him 

i do not wish to discuss heliogabalus  macrinus  or julian  who  being
thoroughly contemptible  were quickly wiped out  but i will bring this
discourse to a conclusion by saying that princes in our times have this
difficulty of giving inordinate satisfaction to their soldiers in a far
less degree  because  notwithstanding one has to give them some
indulgence  that is soon done  none of these princes have armies that
are veterans in the governance and administration of provinces  as were
the armies of the roman empire  and whereas it was then more necessary
to give satisfaction to the soldiers than to the people  it is now more
necessary to all princes  except the turk and the soldan  to satisfy
the people rather the soldiers  because the people are the more
powerful 

from the above i have excepted the turk  who always keeps round him
twelve thousand infantry and fifteen thousand cavalry on which depend
the security and strength of the kingdom  and it is necessary that 
putting aside every consideration for the people  he should keep them
his friends  the kingdom of the soldan is similar  being entirely in
the hands of soldiers  it follows again that  without regard to the
people  he must keep them his friends  but you must note that the state
of the soldan is unlike all other principalities  for the reason that
it is like the christian pontificate  which cannot be called either an
hereditary or a newly formed principality  because the sons of the old
prince are not the heirs  but he who is elected to that position by
those who have authority  and the sons remain only noblemen  and this
being an ancient custom  it cannot be called a new principality 
because there are none of those difficulties in it that are met with in
new ones  for although the prince is new  the constitution of the state
is old  and it is framed so as to receive him as if he were its
hereditary lord 

but returning to the subject of our discourse  i say that whoever will
consider it will acknowledge that either hatred or contempt has been
fatal to the above named emperors  and it will be recognized also how
it happened that  a number of them acting in one way and a number in
another  only one in each way came to a happy end and the rest to
unhappy ones  because it would have been useless and dangerous for
pertinax and alexander  being new princes  to imitate marcus  who was
heir to the principality  and likewise it would have been utterly
destructive to caracalla  commodus  and maximinus to have imitated
severus  they not having sufficient valour to enable them to tread in
his footsteps  therefore a prince  new to the principality  cannot
imitate the actions of marcus  nor  again  is it necessary to follow
those of severus  but he ought to take from severus those parts which
are necessary to found his state  and from marcus those which are
proper and glorious to keep a state that may already be stable and
firm 




chapter xx 
are fortresses  and many other things to which princes often resort 
advantageous or hurtful?


1  some princes  so as to hold securely the state  have disarmed their
subjects  others have kept their subject towns distracted by factions 
others have fostered enmities against themselves  others have laid
themselves out to gain over those whom they distrusted in the beginning
of their governments  some have built fortresses  some have overthrown
and destroyed them  and although one cannot give a final judgment on
all of these things unless one possesses the particulars of those
states in which a decision has to be made  nevertheless i will speak as
comprehensively as the matter of itself will admit 

2  there never was a new prince who has disarmed his subjects  rather
when he has found them disarmed he has always armed them  because  by
arming them  those arms become yours  those men who were distrusted
become faithful  and those who were faithful are kept so  and your
subjects become your adherents  and whereas all subjects cannot be
armed  yet when those whom you do arm are benefited  the others can be
handled more freely  and this difference in their treatment  which they
quite understand  makes the former your dependents  and the latter 
considering it to be necessary that those who have the most danger and
service should have the most reward  excuse you  but when you disarm
them  you at once offend them by showing that you distrust them  either
for cowardice or for want of loyalty  and either of these opinions
breeds hatred against you  and because you cannot remain unarmed  it
follows that you turn to mercenaries  which are of the character
already shown  even if they should be good they would not be sufficient
to defend you against powerful enemies and distrusted subjects 
therefore  as i have said  a new prince in a new principality has
always distributed arms  histories are full of examples  but when a
prince acquires a new state  which he adds as a province to his old
one  then it is necessary to disarm the men of that state  except those
who have been his adherents in acquiring it  and these again  with time
and opportunity  should be rendered soft and effeminate  and matters
should be managed in such a way that all the armed men in the state
shall be your own soldiers who in your old state were living near you 

3  our forefathers  and those who were reckoned wise  were accustomed
to say that it was necessary to hold pistoia by factions and pisa by
fortresses  and with this idea they fostered quarrels in some of their
tributary towns so as to keep possession of them the more easily  this
may have been well enough in those times when italy was in a way
balanced  but i do not believe that it can be accepted as a precept for
to day  because i do not believe that factions can ever be of use 
rather it is certain that when the enemy comes upon you in divided
cities you are quickly lost  because the weakest party will always
assist the outside forces and the other will not be able to resist  the
venetians  moved  as i believe  by the above reasons  fostered the
guelph and ghibelline factions in their tributary cities  and although
they never allowed them to come to bloodshed  yet they nursed these
disputes amongst them  so that the citizens  distracted by their
differences  should not unite against them  which  as we saw  did not
afterwards turn out as expected  because  after the rout at vaila  one
party at once took courage and seized the state  such methods argue 
therefore  weakness in the prince  because these factions will never be
permitted in a vigorous principality  such methods for enabling one the
more easily to manage subjects are only useful in times of peace  but
if war comes this policy proves fallacious 

4  without doubt princes become great when they overcome the
difficulties and obstacles by which they are confronted  and therefore
fortune  especially when she desires to make a new prince great  who
has a greater necessity to earn renown than an hereditary one  causes
enemies to arise and form designs against him  in order that he may
have the opportunity of overcoming them  and by them to mount higher 
as by a ladder which his enemies have raised  for this reason many
consider that a wise prince  when he has the opportunity  ought with
craft to foster some animosity against himself  so that  having crushed
it  his renown may rise higher 

5  princes  especially new ones  have found more fidelity and
assistance in those men who in the beginning of their rule were
distrusted than among those who in the beginning were trusted  pandolfo
petrucci  prince of siena  ruled his state more by those who had been
distrusted than by others  but on this question one cannot speak
generally  for it varies so much with the individual  i will only say
this  that those men who at the commencement of a princedom have been
hostile  if they are of a description to need assistance to support
themselves  can always be gained over with the greatest ease  and they
will be tightly held to serve the prince with fidelity  inasmuch as
they know it to be very necessary for them to cancel by deeds the bad
impression which he had formed of them  and thus the prince always
extracts more profit from them than from those who  serving him in too
much security  may neglect his affairs  and since the matter demands
it  i must not fail to warn a prince  who by means of secret favours
has acquired a new state  that he must well consider the reasons which
induced those to favour him who did so  and if it be not a natural
affection towards him  but only discontent with their government  then
he will only keep them friendly with great trouble and difficulty  for
it will be impossible to satisfy them  and weighing well the reasons
for this in those examples which can be taken from ancient and modern
affairs  we shall find that it is easier for the prince to make friends
of those men who were contented under the former government  and are
therefore his enemies  than of those who  being discontented with it 
were favourable to him and encouraged him to seize it 

6  it has been a custom with princes  in order to hold their states
more securely  to build fortresses that may serve as a bridle and bit
to those who might design to work against them  and as a place of
refuge from a first attack  i praise this system because it has been
made use of formerly  notwithstanding that  messer nicolo vitelli in
our times has been seen to demolish two fortresses in citta di castello
so that he might keep that state  guido ubaldo  duke of urbino  on
returning to his dominion  whence he had been driven by cesare borgia 
razed to the foundations all the fortresses in that province  and
considered that without them it would be more difficult to lose it  the
bentivogli returning to bologna came to a similar decision  fortresses 
therefore  are useful or not according to circumstances  if they do you
good in one way they injure you in another  and this question can be
reasoned thus  the prince who has more to fear from the people than
from foreigners ought to build fortresses  but he who has more to fear
from foreigners than from the people ought to leave them alone  the
castle of milan  built by francesco sforza  has made  and will make 
more trouble for the house of sforza than any other disorder in the
state  for this reason the best possible fortress is—not to be hated by
the people  because  although you may hold the fortresses  yet they
will not save you if the people hate you  for there will never be
wanting foreigners to assist a people who have taken arms against you 
it has not been seen in our times that such fortresses have been of use
to any prince  unless to the countess of forli  1  when the count
girolamo  her consort  was killed  for by that means she was able to
withstand the popular attack and wait for assistance from milan  and
thus recover her state  and the posture of affairs was such at that
time that the foreigners could not assist the people  but fortresses
were of little value to her afterwards when cesare borgia attacked her 
and when the people  her enemy  were allied with foreigners  therefore 
it would have been safer for her  both then and before  not to have
been hated by the people than to have had the fortresses  all these
things considered then  i shall praise him who builds fortresses as
well as him who does not  and i shall blame whoever  trusting in them 
cares little about being hated by the people 

  1  catherine sforza  a daughter of galeazzo sforza and lucrezia
 landriani  born 1463  died 1509  it was to the countess of forli that
 machiavelli was sent as envoy on 1499  a letter from fortunati to the
 countess announces the appointment  “i have been with the signori ”
 wrote fortunati  “to learn whom they would send and when  they tell me
 that nicolo machiavelli  a learned young florentine noble  secretary
 to my lords of the ten  is to leave with me at once ”  cf   “catherine
 sforza ” by count pasolini  translated by p  sylvester  1898 




chapter xxi 
how a prince should conduct himself so as to gain renown


nothing makes a prince so much esteemed as great enterprises and
setting a fine example  we have in our time ferdinand of aragon  the
present king of spain  he can almost be called a new prince  because he
has risen  by fame and glory  from being an insignificant king to be
the foremost king in christendom  and if you will consider his deeds
you will find them all great and some of them extraordinary  in the
beginning of his reign he attacked granada  and this enterprise was the
foundation of his dominions  he did this quietly at first and without
any fear of hindrance  for he held the minds of the barons of castile
occupied in thinking of the war and not anticipating any innovations 
thus they did not perceive that by these means he was acquiring power
and authority over them  he was able with the money of the church and
of the people to sustain his armies  and by that long war to lay the
foundation for the military skill which has since distinguished him 
further  always using religion as a plea  so as to undertake greater
schemes  he devoted himself with pious cruelty to driving out and
clearing his kingdom of the moors  nor could there be a more admirable
example  nor one more rare  under this same cloak he assailed africa 
he came down on italy  he has finally attacked france  and thus his
achievements and designs have always been great  and have kept the
minds of his people in suspense and admiration and occupied with the
issue of them  and his actions have arisen in such a way  one out of
the other  that men have never been given time to work steadily against
him 

again  it much assists a prince to set unusual examples in internal
affairs  similar to those which are related of messer bernabo da
milano  who  when he had the opportunity  by any one in civil life
doing some extraordinary thing  either good or bad  would take some
method of rewarding or punishing him  which would be much spoken about 
and a prince ought  above all things  always endeavour in every action
to gain for himself the reputation of being a great and remarkable man 

a prince is also respected when he is either a true friend or a
downright enemy  that is to say  when  without any reservation  he
declares himself in favour of one party against the other  which course
will always be more advantageous than standing neutral  because if two
of your powerful neighbours come to blows  they are of such a character
that  if one of them conquers  you have either to fear him or not  in
either case it will always be more advantageous for you to declare
yourself and to make war strenuously  because  in the first case  if
you do not declare yourself  you will invariably fall a prey to the
conqueror  to the pleasure and satisfaction of him who has been
conquered  and you will have no reasons to offer  nor anything to
protect or to shelter you  because he who conquers does not want
doubtful friends who will not aid him in the time of trial  and he who
loses will not harbour you because you did not willingly  sword in
hand  court his fate 

antiochus went into greece  being sent for by the ætolians to drive out
the romans  he sent envoys to the achaeans  who were friends of the
romans  exhorting them to remain neutral  and on the other hand the
romans urged them to take up arms  this question came to be discussed
in the council of the achaeans  where the legate of antiochus urged
them to stand neutral  to this the roman legate answered  “as for that
which has been said  that it is better and more advantageous for your
state not to interfere in our war  nothing can be more erroneous 
because by not interfering you will be left  without favour or
consideration  the guerdon of the conqueror ” thus it will always
happen that he who is not your friend will demand your neutrality 
whilst he who is your friend will entreat you to declare yourself with
arms  and irresolute princes  to avoid present dangers  generally
follow the neutral path  and are generally ruined  but when a prince
declares himself gallantly in favour of one side  if the party with
whom he allies himself conquers  although the victor may be powerful
and may have him at his mercy  yet he is indebted to him  and there is
established a bond of amity  and men are never so shameless as to
become a monument of ingratitude by oppressing you  victories after all
are never so complete that the victor must not show some regard 
especially to justice  but if he with whom you ally yourself loses  you
may be sheltered by him  and whilst he is able he may aid you  and you
become companions on a fortune that may rise again 

in the second case  when those who fight are of such a character that
you have no anxiety as to who may conquer  so much the more is it
greater prudence to be allied  because you assist at the destruction of
one by the aid of another who  if he had been wise  would have saved
him  and conquering  as it is impossible that he should not do with
your assistance  he remains at your discretion  and here it is to be
noted that a prince ought to take care never to make an alliance with
one more powerful than himself for the purposes of attacking others 
unless necessity compels him  as is said above  because if he conquers
you are at his discretion  and princes ought to avoid as much as
possible being at the discretion of any one  the venetians joined with
france against the duke of milan  and this alliance  which caused their
ruin  could have been avoided  but when it cannot be avoided  as
happened to the florentines when the pope and spain sent armies to
attack lombardy  then in such a case  for the above reasons  the prince
ought to favour one of the parties 

never let any government imagine that it can choose perfectly safe
courses  rather let it expect to have to take very doubtful ones 
because it is found in ordinary affairs that one never seeks to avoid
one trouble without running into another  but prudence consists in
knowing how to distinguish the character of troubles  and for choice to
take the lesser evil 

a prince ought also to show himself a patron of ability  and to honour
the proficient in every art  at the same time he should encourage his
citizens to practise their callings peaceably  both in commerce and
agriculture  and in every other following  so that the one should not
be deterred from improving his possessions for fear lest they be taken
away from him or another from opening up trade for fear of taxes  but
the prince ought to offer rewards to whoever wishes to do these things
and designs in any way to honour his city or state 

further  he ought to entertain the people with festivals and spectacles
at convenient seasons of the year  and as every city is divided into
guilds or into societies  1  he ought to hold such bodies in esteem 
and associate with them sometimes  and show himself an example of
courtesy and liberality  nevertheless  always maintaining the majesty
of his rank  for this he must never consent to abate in anything 

  1  “guilds or societies ” “in arti o in tribu ” “arti” were craft or
 trade guilds   cf   florio  “arte       a whole company of any trade
 in any city or corporation town ” the guilds of florence are most
 admirably described by mr edgcumbe staley in his work on the subject
 (methuen  1906)  institutions of a somewhat similar character  called
 “artel ” exist in russia to day   cf   sir mackenzie wallace’s
 “russia ” ed  1905  “the sons       were always during the working
 season members of an artel  in some of the larger towns there are
 artels of a much more complex kind— permanent associations  possessing
 large capital  and pecuniarily responsible for the acts of the
 individual members ” the word “artel ” despite its apparent
 similarity  has  mr aylmer maude assures me  no connection with “ars”
 or “arte ” its root is that of the verb “rotisya ” to bind oneself by
 an oath  and it is generally admitted to be only another form of
 “rota ” which now signifies a “regimental company ” in both words the
 underlying idea is that of a body of men united by an oath  “tribu”
 were possibly gentile groups  united by common descent  and included
 individuals connected by marriage  perhaps our words “sects” or
 “clans” would be most appropriate 




chapter xxii 
concerning the secretaries of princes


the choice of servants is of no little importance to a prince  and they
are good or not according to the discrimination of the prince  and the
first opinion which one forms of a prince  and of his understanding  is
by observing the men he has around him  and when they are capable and
faithful he may always be considered wise  because he has known how to
recognize the capable and to keep them faithful  but when they are
otherwise one cannot form a good opinion of him  for the prime error
which he made was in choosing them 

there were none who knew messer antonio da venafro as the servant of
pandolfo petrucci  prince of siena  who would not consider pandolfo to
be a very clever man in having venafro for his servant  because there
are three classes of intellects  one which comprehends by itself 
another which appreciates what others comprehended  and a third which
neither comprehends by itself nor by the showing of others  the first
is the most excellent  the second is good  the third is useless 
therefore  it follows necessarily that  if pandolfo was not in the
first rank  he was in the second  for whenever one has judgment to know
good and bad when it is said and done  although he himself may not have
the initiative  yet he can recognize the good and the bad in his
servant  and the one he can praise and the other correct  thus the
servant cannot hope to deceive him  and is kept honest 

but to enable a prince to form an opinion of his servant there is one
test which never fails  when you see the servant thinking more of his
own interests than of yours  and seeking inwardly his own profit in
everything  such a man will never make a good servant  nor will you
ever be able to trust him  because he who has the state of another in
his hands ought never to think of himself  but always of his prince 
and never pay any attention to matters in which the prince is not
concerned 

on the other hand  to keep his servant honest the prince ought to study
him  honouring him  enriching him  doing him kindnesses  sharing with
him the honours and cares  and at the same time let him see that he
cannot stand alone  so that many honours may not make him desire more 
many riches make him wish for more  and that many cares may make him
dread chances  when  therefore  servants  and princes towards servants 
are thus disposed  they can trust each other  but when it is otherwise 
the end will always be disastrous for either one or the other 




chapter xxiii 
how flatterers should be avoided


i do not wish to leave out an important branch of this subject  for it
is a danger from which princes are with difficulty preserved  unless
they are very careful and discriminating  it is that of flatterers  of
whom courts are full  because men are so self complacent in their own
affairs  and in a way so deceived in them  that they are preserved with
difficulty from this pest  and if they wish to defend themselves they
run the danger of falling into contempt  because there is no other way
of guarding oneself from flatterers except letting men understand that
to tell you the truth does not offend you  but when every one may tell
you the truth  respect for you abates 

therefore a wise prince ought to hold a third course by choosing the
wise men in his state  and giving to them only the liberty of speaking
the truth to him  and then only of those things of which he inquires 
and of none others  but he ought to question them upon everything  and
listen to their opinions  and afterwards form his own conclusions  with
these councillors  separately and collectively  he ought to carry
himself in such a way that each of them should know that  the more
freely he shall speak  the more he shall be preferred  outside of
these  he should listen to no one  pursue the thing resolved on  and be
steadfast in his resolutions  he who does otherwise is either
overthrown by flatterers  or is so often changed by varying opinions
that he falls into contempt 

i wish on this subject to adduce a modern example  fra luca  the man of
affairs to maximilian  1  the present emperor  speaking of his majesty 
said  he consulted with no one  yet never got his own way in anything 
this arose because of his following a practice the opposite to the
above  for the emperor is a secretive man—he does not communicate his
designs to any one  nor does he receive opinions on them  but as in
carrying them into effect they become revealed and known  they are at
once obstructed by those men whom he has around him  and he  being
pliant  is diverted from them  hence it follows that those things he
does one day he undoes the next  and no one ever understands what he
wishes or intends to do  and no one can rely on his resolutions 

  1  maximilian i  born in 1459  died 1519  emperor of the holy roman
 empire  he married  first  mary  daughter of charles the bold  after
 her death  bianca sforza  and thus became involved in italian
 politics 

a prince  therefore  ought always to take counsel  but only when he
wishes and not when others wish  he ought rather to discourage every
one from offering advice unless he asks it  but  however  he ought to
be a constant inquirer  and afterwards a patient listener concerning
the things of which he inquired  also  on learning that any one  on any
consideration  has not told him the truth  he should let his anger be
felt 

and if there are some who think that a prince who conveys an impression
of his wisdom is not so through his own ability  but through the good
advisers that he has around him  beyond doubt they are deceived 
because this is an axiom which never fails  that a prince who is not
wise himself will never take good advice  unless by chance he has
yielded his affairs entirely to one person who happens to be a very
prudent man  in this case indeed he may be well governed  but it would
not be for long  because such a governor would in a short time take
away his state from him 

but if a prince who is not inexperienced should take counsel from more
than one he will never get united counsels  nor will he know how to
unite them  each of the counsellors will think of his own interests 
and the prince will not know how to control them or to see through
them  and they are not to be found otherwise  because men will always
prove untrue to you unless they are kept honest by constraint 
therefore it must be inferred that good counsels  whencesoever they
come  are born of the wisdom of the prince  and not the wisdom of the
prince from good counsels 




chapter xxiv 
why the princes of italy have lost their states


the previous suggestions  carefully observed  will enable a new prince
to appear well established  and render him at once more secure and
fixed in the state than if he had been long seated there  for the
actions of a new prince are more narrowly observed than those of an
hereditary one  and when they are seen to be able they gain more men
and bind far tighter than ancient blood  because men are attracted more
by the present than by the past  and when they find the present good
they enjoy it and seek no further  they will also make the utmost
defence of a prince if he fails them not in other things  thus it will
be a double glory for him to have established a new principality  and
adorned and strengthened it with good laws  good arms  good allies  and
with a good example  so will it be a double disgrace to him who  born a
prince  shall lose his state by want of wisdom 

and if those seigniors are considered who have lost their states in
italy in our times  such as the king of naples  the duke of milan  and
others  there will be found in them  firstly  one common defect in
regard to arms from the causes which have been discussed at length  in
the next place  some one of them will be seen  either to have had the
people hostile  or if he has had the people friendly  he has not known
how to secure the nobles  in the absence of these defects states that
have power enough to keep an army in the field cannot be lost 

philip of macedon  not the father of alexander the great  but he who
was conquered by titus quintius  had not much territory compared to the
greatness of the romans and of greece who attacked him  yet being a
warlike man who knew how to attract the people and secure the nobles 
he sustained the war against his enemies for many years  and if in the
end he lost the dominion of some cities  nevertheless he retained the
kingdom 

therefore  do not let our princes accuse fortune for the loss of their
principalities after so many years’ possession  but rather their own
sloth  because in quiet times they never thought there could be a
change (it is a common defect in man not to make any provision in the
calm against the tempest)  and when afterwards the bad times came they
thought of flight and not of defending themselves  and they hoped that
the people  disgusted with the insolence of the conquerors  would
recall them  this course  when others fail  may be good  but it is very
bad to have neglected all other expedients for that  since you would
never wish to fall because you trusted to be able to find someone later
on to restore you  this again either does not happen  or  if it does 
it will not be for your security  because that deliverance is of no
avail which does not depend upon yourself  those only are reliable 
certain  and durable that depend on yourself and your valour 




chapter xxv 
what fortune can effect in human affairs and how to withstand her


it is not unknown to me how many men have had  and still have  the
opinion that the affairs of the world are in such wise governed by
fortune and by god that men with their wisdom cannot direct them and
that no one can even help them  and because of this they would have us
believe that it is not necessary to labour much in affairs  but to let
chance govern them  this opinion has been more credited in our times
because of the great changes in affairs which have been seen  and may
still be seen  every day  beyond all human conjecture  sometimes
pondering over this  i am in some degree inclined to their opinion 
nevertheless  not to extinguish our free will  i hold it to be true
that fortune is the arbiter of one half of our actions  1  but that she
still leaves us to direct the other half  or perhaps a little less 

  1  frederick the great was accustomed to say  “the older one gets the
 more convinced one becomes that his majesty king chance does
 three quarters of the business of this miserable universe ” sorel’s
 “eastern question ”

i compare her to one of those raging rivers  which when in flood
overflows the plains  sweeping away trees and buildings  bearing away
the soil from place to place  everything flies before it  all yield to
its violence  without being able in any way to withstand it  and yet 
though its nature be such  it does not follow therefore that men  when
the weather becomes fair  shall not make provision  both with defences
and barriers  in such a manner that  rising again  the waters may pass
away by canal  and their force be neither so unrestrained nor so
dangerous  so it happens with fortune  who shows her power where valour
has not prepared to resist her  and thither she turns her forces where
she knows that barriers and defences have not been raised to constrain
her 

and if you will consider italy  which is the seat of these changes  and
which has given to them their impulse  you will see it to be an open
country without barriers and without any defence  for if it had been
defended by proper valour  as are germany  spain  and france  either
this invasion would not have made the great changes it has made or it
would not have come at all  and this i consider enough to say
concerning resistance to fortune in general 

but confining myself more to the particular  i say that a prince may be
seen happy to day and ruined to morrow without having shown any change
of disposition or character  this  i believe  arises firstly from
causes that have already been discussed at length  namely  that the
prince who relies entirely on fortune is lost when it changes  i
believe also that he will be successful who directs his actions
according to the spirit of the times  and that he whose actions do not
accord with the times will not be successful  because men are seen  in
affairs that lead to the end which every man has before him  namely 
glory and riches  to get there by various methods  one with caution 
another with haste  one by force  another by skill  one by patience 
another by its opposite  and each one succeeds in reaching the goal by
a different method  one can also see of two cautious men the one attain
his end  the other fail  and similarly  two men by different
observances are equally successful  the one being cautious  the other
impetuous  all this arises from nothing else than whether or not they
conform in their methods to the spirit of the times  this follows from
what i have said  that two men working differently bring about the same
effect  and of two working similarly  one attains his object and the
other does not 

changes in estate also issue from this  for if  to one who governs
himself with caution and patience  times and affairs converge in such a
way that his administration is successful  his fortune is made  but if
times and affairs change  he is ruined if he does not change his course
of action  but a man is not often found sufficiently circumspect to
know how to accommodate himself to the change  both because he cannot
deviate from what nature inclines him to do  and also because  having
always prospered by acting in one way  he cannot be persuaded that it
is well to leave it  and  therefore  the cautious man  when it is time
to turn adventurous  does not know how to do it  hence he is ruined 
but had he changed his conduct with the times fortune would not have
changed 

pope julius the second went to work impetuously in all his affairs  and
found the times and circumstances conform so well to that line of
action that he always met with success  consider his first enterprise
against bologna  messer giovanni bentivogli being still alive  the
venetians were not agreeable to it  nor was the king of spain  and he
had the enterprise still under discussion with the king of france 
nevertheless he personally entered upon the expedition with his
accustomed boldness and energy  a move which made spain and the
venetians stand irresolute and passive  the latter from fear  the
former from desire to recover the kingdom of naples  on the other hand 
he drew after him the king of france  because that king  having
observed the movement  and desiring to make the pope his friend so as
to humble the venetians  found it impossible to refuse him  therefore
julius with his impetuous action accomplished what no other pontiff
with simple human wisdom could have done  for if he had waited in rome
until he could get away  with his plans arranged and everything fixed 
as any other pontiff would have done  he would never have succeeded 
because the king of france would have made a thousand excuses  and the
others would have raised a thousand fears 

i will leave his other actions alone  as they were all alike  and they
all succeeded  for the shortness of his life did not let him experience
the contrary  but if circumstances had arisen which required him to go
cautiously  his ruin would have followed  because he would never have
deviated from those ways to which nature inclined him 

i conclude  therefore that  fortune being changeful and mankind
steadfast in their ways  so long as the two are in agreement men are
successful  but unsuccessful when they fall out  for my part i consider
that it is better to be adventurous than cautious  because fortune is a
woman  and if you wish to keep her under it is necessary to beat and
ill use her  and it is seen that she allows herself to be mastered by
the adventurous rather than by those who go to work more coldly  she
is  therefore  always  woman like  a lover of young men  because they
are less cautious  more violent  and with more audacity command her 




chapter xxvi 
an exhortation to liberate italy from the barbarians


having carefully considered the subject of the above discourses  and
wondering within myself whether the present times were propitious to a
new prince  and whether there were elements that would give an
opportunity to a wise and virtuous one to introduce a new order of
things which would do honour to him and good to the people of this
country  it appears to me that so many things concur to favour a new
prince that i never knew a time more fit than the present 

and if  as i said  it was necessary that the people of israel should be
captive so as to make manifest the ability of moses  that the persians
should be oppressed by the medes so as to discover the greatness of the
soul of cyrus  and that the athenians should be dispersed to illustrate
the capabilities of theseus  then at the present time  in order to
discover the virtue of an italian spirit  it was necessary that italy
should be reduced to the extremity that she is now in  that she should
be more enslaved than the hebrews  more oppressed than the persians 
more scattered than the athenians  without head  without order  beaten 
despoiled  torn  overrun  and to have endured every kind of desolation 

although lately some spark may have been shown by one  which made us
think he was ordained by god for our redemption  nevertheless it was
afterwards seen  in the height of his career  that fortune rejected
him  so that italy  left as without life  waits for him who shall yet
heal her wounds and put an end to the ravaging and plundering of
lombardy  to the swindling and taxing of the kingdom and of tuscany 
and cleanse those sores that for long have festered  it is seen how she
entreats god to send someone who shall deliver her from these wrongs
and barbarous insolencies  it is seen also that she is ready and
willing to follow a banner if only someone will raise it 

nor is there to be seen at present one in whom she can place more hope
than in your illustrious house  1  with its valour and fortune 
favoured by god and by the church of which it is now the chief  and
which could be made the head of this redemption  this will not be
difficult if you will recall to yourself the actions and lives of the
men i have named  and although they were great and wonderful men  yet
they were men  and each one of them had no more opportunity than the
present offers  for their enterprises were neither more just nor easier
than this  nor was god more their friend than he is yours 

  1  giuliano de medici  he had just been created a cardinal by leo x 
 in 1523 giuliano was elected pope  and took the title of clement vii 

with us there is great justice  because that war is just which is
necessary  and arms are hallowed when there is no other hope but in
them  here there is the greatest willingness  and where the willingness
is great the difficulties cannot be great if you will only follow those
men to whom i have directed your attention  further than this  how
extraordinarily the ways of god have been manifested beyond example 
the sea is divided  a cloud has led the way  the rock has poured forth
water  it has rained manna  everything has contributed to your
greatness  you ought to do the rest  god is not willing to do
everything  and thus take away our free will and that share of glory
which belongs to us 

and it is not to be wondered at if none of the above named italians
have been able to accomplish all that is expected from your illustrious
house  and if in so many revolutions in italy  and in so many
campaigns  it has always appeared as if military virtue were exhausted 
this has happened because the old order of things was not good  and
none of us have known how to find a new one  and nothing honours a man
more than to establish new laws and new ordinances when he himself was
newly risen  such things when they are well founded and dignified will
make him revered and admired  and in italy there are not wanting
opportunities to bring such into use in every form 

here there is great valour in the limbs whilst it fails in the head 
look attentively at the duels and the hand to hand combats  how
superior the italians are in strength  dexterity  and subtlety  but
when it comes to armies they do not bear comparison  and this springs
entirely from the insufficiency of the leaders  since those who are
capable are not obedient  and each one seems to himself to know  there
having never been any one so distinguished above the rest  either by
valour or fortune  that others would yield to him  hence it is that for
so long a time  and during so much fighting in the past twenty years 
whenever there has been an army wholly italian  it has always given a
poor account of itself  the first witness to this is il taro 
afterwards allesandria  capua  genoa  vaila  bologna  mestri  2 

  2  the battles of il taro  1495  alessandria  1499  capua  1501 
 genoa  1507  vaila  1509  bologna  1511  mestri  1513 

if  therefore  your illustrious house wishes to follow these remarkable
men who have redeemed their country  it is necessary before all things 
as a true foundation for every enterprise  to be provided with your own
forces  because there can be no more faithful  truer  or better
soldiers  and although singly they are good  altogether they will be
much better when they find themselves commanded by their prince 
honoured by him  and maintained at his expense  therefore it is
necessary to be prepared with such arms  so that you can be defended
against foreigners by italian valour 

and although swiss and spanish infantry may be considered very
formidable  nevertheless there is a defect in both  by reason of which
a third order would not only be able to oppose them  but might be
relied upon to overthrow them  for the spaniards cannot resist cavalry 
and the switzers are afraid of infantry whenever they encounter them in
close combat  owing to this  as has been and may again be seen  the
spaniards are unable to resist french cavalry  and the switzers are
overthrown by spanish infantry  and although a complete proof of this
latter cannot be shown  nevertheless there was some evidence of it at
the battle of ravenna  when the spanish infantry were confronted by
german battalions  who follow the same tactics as the swiss  when the
spaniards  by agility of body and with the aid of their shields  got in
under the pikes of the germans and stood out of danger  able to attack 
while the germans stood helpless  and  if the cavalry had not dashed
up  all would have been over with them  it is possible  therefore 
knowing the defects of both these infantries  to invent a new one 
which will resist cavalry and not be afraid of infantry  this need not
create a new order of arms  but a variation upon the old  and these are
the kind of improvements which confer reputation and power upon a new
prince 

this opportunity  therefore  ought not to be allowed to pass for
letting italy at last see her liberator appear  nor can one express the
love with which he would be received in all those provinces which have
suffered so much from these foreign scourings  with what thirst for
revenge  with what stubborn faith  with what devotion  with what tears 
what door would be closed to him? who would refuse obedience to him?
what envy would hinder him? what italian would refuse him homage? to
all of us this barbarous dominion stinks  let  therefore  your
illustrious house take up this charge with that courage and hope with
which all just enterprises are undertaken  so that under its standard
our native country may be ennobled  and under its auspices may be
verified that saying of petrarch 

virtu contro al furore
    prendera l’arme  e fia il combatter corto 
che l’antico valore
    negli italici cuor non e ancor morto 

virtue against fury shall advance the fight 
    and it i’ th’ combat soon shall put to flight 
for the old roman valour is not dead 
    nor in th’ italians’ brests extinguished 

edward dacre  1640 




description of the methods adopted by the duke valentino when murdering
vitellozzo vitelli  oliverotto da fermo  the signor pagolo  and the
duke di gravina orsini

by nicolo machiavelli


the duke valentino had returned from lombardy  where he had been to
clear himself with the king of france from the calumnies which had been
raised against him by the florentines concerning the rebellion of
arezzo and other towns in the val di chiana  and had arrived at imola 
whence he intended with his army to enter upon the campaign against
giovanni bentivogli  the tyrant of bologna  for he intended to bring
that city under his domination  and to make it the head of his
romagnian duchy 

these matters coming to the knowledge of the vitelli and orsini and
their following  it appeared to them that the duke would become too
powerful  and it was feared that  having seized bologna  he would seek
to destroy them in order that he might become supreme in italy  upon
this a meeting was called at magione in the district of perugia  to
which came the cardinal  pagolo  and the duke di gravina orsini 
vitellozzo vitelli  oliverotto da fermo  gianpagolo baglioni  the
tyrant of perugia  and messer antonio da venafro  sent by pandolfo
petrucci  the prince of siena  here were discussed the power and
courage of the duke and the necessity of curbing his ambitions  which
might otherwise bring danger to the rest of being ruined  and they
decided not to abandon the bentivogli  but to strive to win over the
florentines  and they sent their men to one place and another 
promising to one party assistance and to another encouragement to unite
with them against the common enemy  this meeting was at once reported
throughout all italy  and those who were discontented under the duke 
among whom were the people of urbino  took hope of effecting a
revolution 

thus it arose that  men’s minds being thus unsettled  it was decided by
certain men of urbino to seize the fortress of san leo  which was held
for the duke  and which they captured by the following means  the
castellan was fortifying the rock and causing timber to be taken there 
so the conspirators watched  and when certain beams which were being
carried to the rock were upon the bridge  so that it was prevented from
being drawn up by those inside  they took the opportunity of leaping
upon the bridge and thence into the fortress  upon this capture being
effected  the whole state rebelled and recalled the old duke  being
encouraged in this  not so much by the capture of the fort  as by the
diet at magione  from whom they expected to get assistance 

those who heard of the rebellion at urbino thought they would not lose
the opportunity  and at once assembled their men so as to take any
town  should any remain in the hands of the duke in that state  and
they sent again to florence to beg that republic to join with them in
destroying the common firebrand  showing that the risk was lessened and
that they ought not to wait for another opportunity 

but the florentines  from hatred  for sundry reasons  of the vitelli
and orsini  not only would not ally themselves  but sent nicolo
machiavelli  their secretary  to offer shelter and assistance to the
duke against his enemies  the duke was found full of fear at imola 
because  against everybody’s expectation  his soldiers had at once gone
over to the enemy and he found himself disarmed and war at his door 
but recovering courage from the offers of the florentines  he decided
to temporize before fighting with the few soldiers that remained to
him  and to negotiate for a reconciliation  and also to get assistance 
this latter he obtained in two ways  by sending to the king of france
for men and by enlisting men at arms and others whom he turned into
cavalry of a sort  to all he gave money 

notwithstanding this  his enemies drew near to him  and approached
fossombrone  where they encountered some men of the duke and  with the
aid of the orsini and vitelli  routed them  when this happened  the
duke resolved at once to see if he could not close the trouble with
offers of reconciliation  and being a most perfect dissembler he did
not fail in any practices to make the insurgents understand that he
wished every man who had acquired anything to keep it  as it was enough
for him to have the title of prince  whilst others might have the
principality 

and the duke succeeded so well in this that they sent signor pagolo to
him to negotiate for a reconciliation  and they brought their army to a
standstill  but the duke did not stop his preparations  and took every
care to provide himself with cavalry and infantry  and that such
preparations might not be apparent to the others  he sent his troops in
separate parties to every part of the romagna  in the meanwhile there
came also to him five hundred french lancers  and although he found
himself sufficiently strong to take vengeance on his enemies in open
war  he considered that it would be safer and more advantageous to
outwit them  and for this reason he did not stop the work of
reconciliation 

and that this might be effected the duke concluded a peace with them in
which he confirmed their former covenants  he gave them four thousand
ducats at once  he promised not to injure the bentivogli  and he formed
an alliance with giovanni  and moreover he would not force them to come
personally into his presence unless it pleased them to do so  on the
other hand  they promised to restore to him the duchy of urbino and
other places seized by them  to serve him in all his expeditions  and
not to make war against or ally themselves with any one without his
permission 

this reconciliation being completed  guido ubaldo  the duke of urbino 
again fled to venice  having first destroyed all the fortresses in his
state  because  trusting in the people  he did not wish that the
fortresses  which he did not think he could defend  should be held by
the enemy  since by these means a check would be kept upon his friends 
but the duke valentino  having completed this convention  and dispersed
his men throughout the romagna  set out for imola at the end of
november together with his french men at arms  thence he went to
cesena  where he stayed some time to negotiate with the envoys of the
vitelli and orsini  who had assembled with their men in the duchy of
urbino  as to the enterprise in which they should now take part  but
nothing being concluded  oliverotto da fermo was sent to propose that
if the duke wished to undertake an expedition against tuscany they were
ready  if he did not wish it  then they would besiege sinigalia  to
this the duke replied that he did not wish to enter into war with
tuscany  and thus become hostile to the florentines  but that he was
very willing to proceed against sinigalia 

it happened that not long afterwards the town surrendered  but the
fortress would not yield to them because the castellan would not give
it up to any one but the duke in person  therefore they exhorted him to
come there  this appeared a good opportunity to the duke  as  being
invited by them  and not going of his own will  he would awaken no
suspicions  and the more to reassure them  he allowed all the french
men at arms who were with him in lombardy to depart  except the hundred
lancers under mons  di candales  his brother in law  he left cesena
about the middle of december  and went to fano  and with the utmost
cunning and cleverness he persuaded the vitelli and orsini to wait for
him at sinigalia  pointing out to them that any lack of compliance
would cast a doubt upon the sincerity and permanency of the
reconciliation  and that he was a man who wished to make use of the
arms and councils of his friends  but vitellozzo remained very
stubborn  for the death of his brother warned him that he should not
offend a prince and afterwards trust him  nevertheless  persuaded by
pagolo orsini  whom the duke had corrupted with gifts and promises  he
agreed to wait 

upon this the duke  before his departure from fano  which was to be on
30th december 1502  communicated his designs to eight of his most
trusted followers  among whom were don michele and the monsignor
d’euna  who was afterwards cardinal  and he ordered that  as soon as
vitellozzo  pagolo orsini  the duke di gravina  and oliverotto should
arrive  his followers in pairs should take them one by one  entrusting
certain men to certain pairs  who should entertain them until they
reached sinigalia  nor should they be permitted to leave until they
came to the duke’s quarters  where they should be seized 

the duke afterwards ordered all his horsemen and infantry  of which
there were more than two thousand cavalry and ten thousand footmen  to
assemble by daybreak at the metauro  a river five miles distant from
fano  and await him there  he found himself  therefore  on the last day
of december at the metauro with his men  and having sent a cavalcade of
about two hundred horsemen before him  he then moved forward the
infantry  whom he accompanied with the rest of the men at arms 

fano and sinigalia are two cities of la marca situated on the shore of
the adriatic sea  fifteen miles distant from each other  so that he who
goes towards sinigalia has the mountains on his right hand  the bases
of which are touched by the sea in some places  the city of sinigalia
is distant from the foot of the mountains a little more than a bow shot
and from the shore about a mile  on the side opposite to the city runs
a little river which bathes that part of the walls looking towards
fano  facing the high road  thus he who draws near to sinigalia comes
for a good space by road along the mountains  and reaches the river
which passes by sinigalia  if he turns to his left hand along the bank
of it  and goes for the distance of a bow shot  he arrives at a bridge
which crosses the river  he is then almost abreast of the gate that
leads into sinigalia  not by a straight line  but transversely  before
this gate there stands a collection of houses with a square to which
the bank of the river forms one side 

the vitelli and orsini having received orders to wait for the duke  and
to honour him in person  sent away their men to several castles distant
from sinigalia about six miles  so that room could be made for the men
of the duke  and they left in sinigalia only oliverotto and his band 
which consisted of one thousand infantry and one hundred and fifty
horsemen  who were quartered in the suburb mentioned above  matters
having been thus arranged  the duke valentino left for sinigalia  and
when the leaders of the cavalry reached the bridge they did not pass
over  but having opened it  one portion wheeled towards the river and
the other towards the country  and a way was left in the middle through
which the infantry passed  without stopping  into the town 

vitellozzo  pagolo  and the duke di gravina on mules  accompanied by a
few horsemen  went towards the duke  vitellozo  unarmed and wearing a
cape lined with green  appeared very dejected  as if conscious of his
approaching death—a circumstance which  in view of the ability of the
man and his former fortune  caused some amazement  and it is said that
when he parted from his men before setting out for sinigalia to meet
the duke he acted as if it were his last parting from them  he
recommended his house and its fortunes to his captains  and advised his
nephews that it was not the fortune of their house  but the virtues of
their fathers that should be kept in mind  these three  therefore  came
before the duke and saluted him respectfully  and were received by him
with goodwill  they were at once placed between those who were
commissioned to look after them 

but the duke noticing that oliverotto  who had remained with his band
in sinigalia  was missing—for oliverotto was waiting in the square
before his quarters near the river  keeping his men in order and
drilling them—signalled with his eye to don michelle  to whom the care
of oliverotto had been committed  that he should take measures that
oliverotto should not escape  therefore don michele rode off and joined
oliverotto  telling him that it was not right to keep his men out of
their quarters  because these might be taken up by the men of the duke 
and he advised him to send them at once to their quarters and to come
himself to meet the duke  and oliverotto  having taken this advice 
came before the duke  who  when he saw him  called to him  and
oliverotto  having made his obeisance  joined the others 

so the whole party entered sinigalia  dismounted at the duke’s
quarters  and went with him into a secret chamber  where the duke made
them prisoners  he then mounted on horseback  and issued orders that
the men of oliverotto and the orsini should be stripped of their arms 
those of oliverotto  being at hand  were quickly settled  but those of
the orsini and vitelli  being at a distance  and having a presentiment
of the destruction of their masters  had time to prepare themselves 
and bearing in mind the valour and discipline of the orsinian and
vitellian houses  they stood together against the hostile forces of the
country and saved themselves 

but the duke’s soldiers  not being content with having pillaged the men
of oliverotto  began to sack sinigalia  and if the duke had not
repressed this outrage by killing some of them they would have
completely sacked it  night having come and the tumult being silenced 
the duke prepared to kill vitellozzo and oliverotto  he led them into a
room and caused them to be strangled  neither of them used words in
keeping with their past lives  vitellozzo prayed that he might ask of
the pope full pardon for his sins  oliverotto cringed and laid the
blame for all injuries against the duke on vitellozzo  pagolo and the
duke di gravina orsini were kept alive until the duke heard from rome
that the pope had taken the cardinal orsino  the archbishop of
florence  and messer jacopo da santa croce  after which news  on 18th
january 1502  in the castle of pieve  they also were strangled in the
same way 




the life of castruccio castracani of lucca

written by nicolo machiavelli

and sent to his friends zanobi buondelmonti and luigi alamanni

castruccio castracani 1284 1328


it appears  dearest zanobi and luigi  a wonderful thing to those who
have considered the matter  that all men  or the larger number of them 
who have performed great deeds in the world  and excelled all others in
their day  have had their birth and beginning in baseness and
obscurity  or have been aggrieved by fortune in some outrageous way 
they have either been exposed to the mercy of wild beasts  or they have
had so mean a parentage that in shame they have given themselves out to
be sons of jove or of some other deity  it would be wearisome to relate
who these persons may have been because they are well known to
everybody  and  as such tales would not be particularly edifying to
those who read them  they are omitted  i believe that these lowly
beginnings of great men occur because fortune is desirous of showing to
the world that such men owe much to her and little to wisdom  because
she begins to show her hand when wisdom can really take no part in
their career  thus all success must be attributed to her  castruccio
castracani of lucca was one of those men who did great deeds  if he is
measured by the times in which he lived and the city in which he was
born  but  like many others  he was neither fortunate nor distinguished
in his birth  as the course of this history will show  it appeared to
be desirable to recall his memory  because i have discerned in him such
indications of valour and fortune as should make him a great exemplar
to men  i think also that i ought to call your attention to his
actions  because you of all men i know delight most in noble deeds 

the family of castracani was formerly numbered among the noble families
of lucca  but in the days of which i speak it had somewhat fallen in
estate  as so often happens in this world  to this family was born a
son antonio  who became a priest of the order of san michele of lucca 
and for this reason was honoured with the title of messer antonio  he
had an only sister  who had been married to buonaccorso cenami  but
buonaccorso dying she became a widow  and not wishing to marry again
went to live with her brother  messer antonio had a vineyard behind the
house where he resided  and as it was bounded on all sides by gardens 
any person could have access to it without difficulty  one morning 
shortly after sunrise  madonna dianora  as the sister of messer antonio
was called  had occasion to go into the vineyard as usual to gather
herbs for seasoning the dinner  and hearing a slight rustling among the
leaves of a vine she turned her eyes in that direction  and heard
something resembling the cry of an infant  whereupon she went towards
it  and saw the hands and face of a baby who was lying enveloped in the
leaves and who seemed to be crying for its mother  partly wondering and
partly fearing  yet full of compassion  she lifted it up and carried it
to the house  where she washed it and clothed it with clean linen as is
customary  and showed it to messer antonio when he returned home  when
he heard what had happened and saw the child he was not less surprised
or compassionate than his sister  they discussed between themselves
what should be done  and seeing that he was priest and that she had no
children  they finally determined to bring it up  they had a nurse for
it  and it was reared and loved as if it were their own child  they
baptized it  and gave it the name of castruccio after their father  as
the years passed castruccio grew very handsome  and gave evidence of
wit and discretion  and learnt with a quickness beyond his years those
lessons which messer antonio imparted to him  messer antonio intended
to make a priest of him  and in time would have inducted him into his
canonry and other benefices  and all his instruction was given with
this object  but antonio discovered that the character of castruccio
was quite unfitted for the priesthood  as soon as castruccio reached
the age of fourteen he began to take less notice of the chiding of
messer antonio and madonna dianora and no longer to fear them  he left
off reading ecclesiastical books  and turned to playing with arms 
delighting in nothing so much as in learning their uses  and in
running  leaping  and wrestling with other boys  in all exercises he
far excelled his companions in courage and bodily strength  and if at
any time he did turn to books  only those pleased him which told of
wars and the mighty deeds of men  messer antonio beheld all this with
vexation and sorrow 

there lived in the city of lucca a gentleman of the guinigi family 
named messer francesco  whose profession was arms and who in riches 
bodily strength  and valour excelled all other men in lucca  he had
often fought under the command of the visconti of milan  and as a
ghibelline was the valued leader of that party in lucca  this gentleman
resided in lucca and was accustomed to assemble with others most
mornings and evenings under the balcony of the podesta  which is at the
top of the square of san michele  the finest square in lucca  and he
had often seen castruccio taking part with other children of the street
in those games of which i have spoken  noticing that castruccio far
excelled the other boys  and that he appeared to exercise a royal
authority over them  and that they loved and obeyed him  messer
francesco became greatly desirous of learning who he was  being
informed of the circumstances of the bringing up of castruccio he felt
a greater desire to have him near to him  therefore he called him one
day and asked him whether he would more willingly live in the house of
a gentleman  where he would learn to ride horses and use arms  or in
the house of a priest  where he would learn nothing but masses and the
services of the church  messer francesco could see that it pleased
castruccio greatly to hear horses and arms spoken of  even though he
stood silent  blushing modestly  but being encouraged by messer
francesco to speak  he answered that  if his master were agreeable 
nothing would please him more than to give up his priestly studies and
take up those of a soldier  this reply delighted messer francesco  and
in a very short time he obtained the consent of messer antonio  who was
driven to yield by his knowledge of the nature of the lad  and the fear
that he would not be able to hold him much longer 

thus castruccio passed from the house of messer antonio the priest to
the house of messer francesco guinigi the soldier  and it was
astonishing to find that in a very short time he manifested all that
virtue and bearing which we are accustomed to associate with a true
gentleman  in the first place he became an accomplished horseman  and
could manage with ease the most fiery charger  and in all jousts and
tournaments  although still a youth  he was observed beyond all others 
and he excelled in all exercises of strength and dexterity  but what
enhanced so much the charm of these accomplishments  was the delightful
modesty which enabled him to avoid offence in either act or word to
others  for he was deferential to the great men  modest with his
equals  and courteous to his inferiors  these gifts made him beloved 
not only by all the guinigi family  but by all lucca  when castruccio
had reached his eighteenth year  the ghibellines were driven from pavia
by the guelphs  and messer francesco was sent by the visconti to assist
the ghibellines  and with him went castruccio  in charge of his forces 
castruccio gave ample proof of his prudence and courage in this
expedition  acquiring greater reputation than any other captain  and
his name and fame were known  not only in pavia  but throughout all
lombardy 

castruccio  having returned to lucca in far higher estimation than he
left it  did not omit to use all the means in his power to gain as many
friends as he could  neglecting none of those arts which are necessary
for that purpose  about this time messer francesco died  leaving a son
thirteen years of age named pagolo  and having appointed castruccio to
be his son’s tutor and administrator of his estate  before he died
francesco called castruccio to him  and prayed him to show pagolo that
goodwill which he (francesco) had always shown to him  and to render to
the son the gratitude which he had not been able to repay to the
father  upon the death of francesco  castruccio became the governor and
tutor of pagolo  which increased enormously his power and position  and
created a certain amount of envy against him in lucca in place of the
former universal goodwill  for many men suspected him of harbouring
tyrannical intentions  among these the leading man was giorgio degli
opizi  the head of the guelph party  this man hoped after the death of
messer francesco to become the chief man in lucca  but it seemed to him
that castruccio  with the great abilities which he already showed  and
holding the position of governor  deprived him of his opportunity 
therefore he began to sow those seeds which should rob castruccio of
his eminence  castruccio at first treated this with scorn  but
afterwards he grew alarmed  thinking that messer giorgio might be able
to bring him into disgrace with the deputy of king ruberto of naples
and have him driven out of lucca 

the lord of pisa at that time was uguccione of the faggiuola of arezzo 
who being in the first place elected their captain afterwards became
their lord  there resided in paris some exiled ghibellines from lucca 
with whom castruccio held communications with the object of effecting
their restoration by the help of uguccione  castruccio also brought
into his plans friends from lucca who would not endure the authority of
the opizi  having fixed upon a plan to be followed  castruccio
cautiously fortified the tower of the onesti  filling it with supplies
and munitions of war  in order that it might stand a siege for a few
days in case of need  when the night came which had been agreed upon
with uguccione  who had occupied the plain between the mountains and
pisa with many men  the signal was given  and without being observed
uguccione approached the gate of san piero and set fire to the
portcullis  castruccio raised a great uproar within the city  calling
the people to arms and forcing open the gate from his side  uguccione
entered with his men  poured through the town  and killed messer
giorgio with all his family and many of his friends and supporters  the
governor was driven out  and the government reformed according to the
wishes of uguccione  to the detriment of the city  because it was found
that more than one hundred families were exiled at that time  of those
who fled  part went to florence and part to pistoia  which city was the
headquarters of the guelph party  and for this reason it became most
hostile to uguccione and the lucchese 

as it now appeared to the florentines and others of the guelph party
that the ghibellines absorbed too much power in tuscany  they
determined to restore the exiled guelphs to lucca  they assembled a
large army in the val di nievole  and seized montecatini  from thence
they marched to montecarlo  in order to secure the free passage into
lucca  upon this uguccione assembled his pisan and lucchese forces  and
with a number of german cavalry which he drew out of lombardy  he moved
against the quarters of the florentines  who upon the appearance of the
enemy withdrew from montecarlo  and posted themselves between
montecatini and pescia  uguccione now took up a position near to
montecarlo  and within about two miles of the enemy  and slight
skirmishes between the horse of both parties were of daily occurrence 
owing to the illness of uguccione  the pisans and lucchese delayed
coming to battle with the enemy  uguccione  finding himself growing
worse  went to montecarlo to be cured  and left the command of the army
in the hands of castruccio  this change brought about the ruin of the
guelphs  who  thinking that the hostile army having lost its captain
had lost its head  grew over confident  castruccio observed this  and
allowed some days to pass in order to encourage this belief  he also
showed signs of fear  and did not allow any of the munitions of the
camp to be used  on the other side  the guelphs grew more insolent the
more they saw these evidences of fear  and every day they drew out in
the order of battle in front of the army of castruccio  presently 
deeming that the enemy was sufficiently emboldened  and having mastered
their tactics  he decided to join battle with them  first he spoke a
few words of encouragement to his soldiers  and pointed out to them the
certainty of victory if they would but obey his commands  castruccio
had noticed how the enemy had placed all his best troops in the centre
of the line of battle  and his less reliable men on the wings of the
army  whereupon he did exactly the opposite  putting his most valiant
men on the flanks  while those on whom he could not so strongly rely he
moved to the centre  observing this order of battle  he drew out of his
lines and quickly came in sight of the hostile army  who  as usual  had
come in their insolence to defy him  he then commanded his centre
squadrons to march slowly  whilst he moved rapidly forward those on the
wings  thus  when they came into contact with the enemy  only the wings
of the two armies became engaged  whilst the center battalions remained
out of action  for these two portions of the line of battle were
separated from each other by a long interval and thus unable to reach
each other  by this expedient the more valiant part of castruccio’s men
were opposed to the weaker part of the enemy’s troops  and the most
efficient men of the enemy were disengaged  and thus the florentines
were unable to fight with those who were arrayed opposite to them  or
to give any assistance to their own flanks  so  without much
difficulty  castruccio put the enemy to flight on both flanks  and the
centre battalions took to flight when they found themselves exposed to
attack  without having a chance of displaying their valour  the defeat
was complete  and the loss in men very heavy  there being more than ten
thousand men killed with many officers and knights of the guelph party
in tuscany  and also many princes who had come to help them  among whom
were piero  the brother of king ruberto  and carlo  his nephew  and
filippo  the lord of taranto  on the part of castruccio the loss did
not amount to more than three hundred men  among whom was francesco 
the son of uguccione  who  being young and rash  was killed in the
first onset 

this victory so greatly increased the reputation of castruccio that
uguccione conceived some jealousy and suspicion of him  because it
appeared to uguccione that this victory had given him no increase of
power  but rather than diminished it  being of this mind  he only
waited for an opportunity to give effect to it  this occurred on the
death of pier agnolo micheli  a man of great repute and abilities in
lucca  the murderer of whom fled to the house of castruccio for refuge 
on the sergeants of the captain going to arrest the murderer  they were
driven off by castruccio  and the murderer escaped  this affair coming
to the knowledge of uguccione  who was then at pisa  it appeared to him
a proper opportunity to punish castruccio  he therefore sent for his
son neri  who was the governor of lucca  and commissioned him to take
castruccio prisoner at a banquet and put him to death  castruccio 
fearing no evil  went to the governor in a friendly way  was
entertained at supper  and then thrown into prison  but neri  fearing
to put him to death lest the people should be incensed  kept him alive 
in order to hear further from his father concerning his intentions 
ugucionne cursed the hesitation and cowardice of his son  and at once
set out from pisa to lucca with four hundred horsemen to finish the
business in his own way  but he had not yet reached the baths when the
pisans rebelled and put his deputy to death and created count gaddo
della gherardesca their lord  before uguccione reached lucca he heard
of the occurrences at pisa  but it did not appear wise to him to turn
back  lest the lucchese with the example of pisa before them should
close their gates against him  but the lucchese  having heard of what
had happened at pisa  availed themselves of this opportunity to demand
the liberation of castruccio  notwithstanding that uguccione had
arrived in their city  they first began to speak of it in private
circles  afterwards openly in the squares and streets  then they raised
a tumult  and with arms in their hands went to uguccione and demanded
that castruccio should be set at liberty  uguccione  fearing that worse
might happen  released him from prison  whereupon castruccio gathered
his friends around him  and with the help of the people attacked
uguccione  who  finding he had no resource but in flight  rode away
with his friends to lombardy  to the lords of scale  where he died in
poverty 

but castruccio from being a prisoner became almost a prince in lucca 
and he carried himself so discreetly with his friends and the people
that they appointed him captain of their army for one year  having
obtained this  and wishing to gain renown in war  he planned the
recovery of the many towns which had rebelled after the departure of
uguccione  and with the help of the pisans  with whom he had concluded
a treaty  he marched to serezzana  to capture this place he constructed
a fort against it  which is called to day zerezzanello  in the course
of two months castruccio captured the town  with the reputation gained
at that siege  he rapidly seized massa  carrara  and lavenza  and in a
short time had overrun the whole of lunigiana  in order to close the
pass which leads from lombardy to lunigiana  he besieged pontremoli and
wrested it from the hands of messer anastagio palavicini  who was the
lord of it  after this victory he returned to lucca  and was welcomed
by the whole people  and now castruccio  deeming it imprudent any
longer to defer making himself a prince  got himself created the lord
of lucca by the help of pazzino del poggio  puccinello dal portico 
francesco boccansacchi  and cecco guinigi  all of whom he had
corrupted  and he was afterwards solemnly and deliberately elected
prince by the people  at this time frederick of bavaria  the king of
the romans  came into italy to assume the imperial crown  and
castruccio  in order that he might make friends with him  met him at
the head of five hundred horsemen  castruccio had left as his deputy in
lucca  pagolo guinigi  who was held in high estimation  because of the
people’s love for the memory of his father  castruccio was received in
great honour by frederick  and many privileges were conferred upon him 
and he was appointed the emperor’s lieutenant in tuscany  at this time
the pisans were in great fear of gaddo della gherardesca  whom they had
driven out of pisa  and they had recourse for assistance to frederick 
frederick created castruccio the lord of pisa  and the pisans  in dread
of the guelph party  and particularly of the florentines  were
constrained to accept him as their lord 

frederick  having appointed a governor in rome to watch his italian
affairs  returned to germany  all the tuscan and lombardian
ghibellines  who followed the imperial lead  had recourse to castruccio
for help and counsel  and all promised him the governorship of his
country  if enabled to recover it with his assistance  among these
exiles were matteo guidi  nardo scolari  lapo uberti  gerozzo nardi 
and piero buonaccorsi  all exiled florentines and ghibellines 
castruccio had the secret intention of becoming the master of all
tuscany by the aid of these men and of his own forces  and in order to
gain greater weight in affairs  he entered into a league with messer
matteo visconti  the prince of milan  and organized for him the forces
of his city and the country districts  as lucca had five gates  he
divided his own country districts into five parts  which he supplied
with arms  and enrolled the men under captains and ensigns  so that he
could quickly bring into the field twenty thousand soldiers  without
those whom he could summon to his assistance from pisa  while he
surrounded himself with these forces and allies  it happened at messer
matteo visconti was attacked by the guelphs of piacenza  who had driven
out the ghibellines with the assistance of a florentine army and the
king ruberto  messer matteo called upon castruccio to invade the
florentines in their own territories  so that  being attacked at home 
they should be compelled to draw their army out of lombardy in order to
defend themselves  castruccio invaded the valdarno  and seized
fucecchio and san miniato  inflicting immense damage upon the country 
whereupon the florentines recalled their army  which had scarcely
reached tuscany  when castruccio was forced by other necessities to
return to lucca 

there resided in the city of lucca the poggio family  who were so
powerful that they could not only elevate castruccio  but even advance
him to the dignity of prince  and it appearing to them they had not
received such rewards for their services as they deserved  they incited
other families to rebel and to drive castruccio out of lucca  they
found their opportunity one morning  and arming themselves  they set
upon the lieutenant whom castruccio had left to maintain order and
killed him  they endeavoured to raise the people in revolt  but stefano
di poggio  a peaceable old man who had taken no hand in the rebellion 
intervened and compelled them by his authority to lay down their arms 
and he offered to be their mediator with castruccio to obtain from him
what they desired  therefore they laid down their arms with no greater
intelligence than they had taken them up  castruccio  having heard the
news of what had happened at lucca  at once put pagolo guinigi in
command of the army  and with a troop of cavalry set out for home 
contrary to his expectations  he found the rebellion at an end  yet he
posted his men in the most advantageous places throughout the city  as
it appeared to stefano that castruccio ought to be very much obliged to
him  he sought him out  and without saying anything on his own behalf 
for he did not recognize any need for doing so  he begged castruccio to
pardon the other members of his family by reason of their youth  their
former friendships  and the obligations which castruccio was under to
their house  to this castruccio graciously responded  and begged
stefano to reassure himself  declaring that it gave him more pleasure
to find the tumult at an end than it had ever caused him anxiety to
hear of its inception  he encouraged stefano to bring his family to
him  saying that he thanked god for having given him the opportunity of
showing his clemency and liberality  upon the word of stefano and
castruccio they surrendered  and with stefano were immediately thrown
into prison and put to death  meanwhile the florentines had recovered
san miniato  whereupon it seemed advisable to castruccio to make peace 
as it did not appear to him that he was sufficiently secure at lucca to
leave him  he approached the florentines with the proposal of a truce 
which they readily entertained  for they were weary of the war  and
desirous of getting rid of the expenses of it  a treaty was concluded
with them for two years  by which both parties agreed to keep the
conquests they had made  castruccio thus released from this trouble 
turned his attention to affairs in lucca  and in order that he should
not again be subject to the perils from which he had just escaped  he 
under various pretences and reasons  first wiped out all those who by
their ambition might aspire to the principality  not sparing one of
them  but depriving them of country and property  and those whom he had
in his hands of life also  stating that he had found by experience that
none of them were to be trusted  then for his further security he
raised a fortress in lucca with the stones of the towers of those whom
he had killed or hunted out of the state 

whilst castruccio made peace with the florentines  and strengthened his
position in lucca  he neglected no opportunity  short of open war  of
increasing his importance elsewhere  it appeared to him that if he
could get possession of pistoia  he would have one foot in florence 
which was his great desire  he  therefore  in various ways made friends
with the mountaineers  and worked matters so in pistoia that both
parties confided their secrets to him  pistoia was divided  as it
always had been  into the bianchi and neri parties  the head of the
bianchi was bastiano di possente  and of the neri  jacopo da gia  each
of these men held secret communications with castruccio  and each
desired to drive the other out of the city  and  after many
threatenings  they came to blows  jacopo fortified himself at the
florentine gate  bastiano at that of the lucchese side of the city 
both trusted more in castruccio than in the florentines  because they
believed that castruccio was far more ready and willing to fight than
the florentines  and they both sent to him for assistance  he gave
promises to both  saying to bastiano that he would come in person  and
to jacopo that he would send his pupil  pagolo guinigi  at the
appointed time he sent forward pagolo by way of pisa  and went himself
direct to pistoia  at midnight both of them met outside the city  and
both were admitted as friends  thus the two leaders entered  and at a
signal given by castruccio  one killed jacopo da gia  and the other
bastiano di possente  and both took prisoners or killed the partisans
of either faction  without further opposition pistoia passed into the
hands of castruccio  who  having forced the signoria to leave the
palace  compelled the people to yield obedience to him  making them
many promises and remitting their old debts  the countryside flocked to
the city to see the new prince  and all were filled with hope and
quickly settled down  influenced in a great measure by his great
valour 

about this time great disturbances arose in rome  owing to the dearness
of living which was caused by the absence of the pontiff at avignon 
the german governor  enrico  was much blamed for what happened—murders
and tumults following each other daily  without his being able to put
an end to them  this caused enrico much anxiety lest the romans should
call in ruberto  the king of naples  who would drive the germans out of
the city  and bring back the pope  having no nearer friend to whom he
could apply for help than castruccio  he sent to him  begging him not
only to give him assistance  but also to come in person to rome 
castruccio considered that he ought not to hesitate to render the
emperor this service  because he believed that he himself would not be
safe if at any time the emperor ceased to hold rome  leaving pagolo
guinigi in command at lucca  castruccio set out for rome with six
hundred horsemen  where he was received by enrico with the greatest
distinction  in a short time the presence of castruccio obtained such
respect for the emperor that  without bloodshed or violence  good order
was restored  chiefly by reason of castruccio having sent by sea from
the country round pisa large quantities of corn  and thus removed the
source of the trouble  when he had chastised some of the roman leaders 
and admonished others  voluntary obedience was rendered to enrico 
castruccio received many honours  and was made a roman senator  this
dignity was assumed with the greatest pomp  castruccio being clothed in
a brocaded toga  which had the following words embroidered on its
front  “i am what god wills ” whilst on the back was  “what god desires
shall be ”

during this time the florentines  who were much enraged that castruccio
should have seized pistoia during the truce  considered how they could
tempt the city to rebel  to do which they thought would not be
difficult in his absence  among the exiled pistoians in florence were
baldo cecchi and jacopo baldini  both men of leading and ready to face
danger  these men kept up communications with their friends in pistoia 
and with the aid of the florentines entered the city by night  and
after driving out some of castruccio’s officials and partisans  and
killing others  they restored the city to its freedom  the news of this
greatly angered castruccio  and taking leave of enrico  he pressed on
in great haste to pistoia  when the florentines heard of his return 
knowing that he would lose no time  they decided to intercept him with
their forces in the val di nievole  under the belief that by doing so
they would cut off his road to pistoia  assembling a great army of the
supporters of the guelph cause  the florentines entered the pistoian
territories  on the other hand  castruccio reached montecarlo with his
army  and having heard where the florentines’ lay  he decided not to
encounter it in the plains of pistoia  nor to await it in the plains of
pescia  but  as far as he possibly could  to attack it boldly in the
pass of serravalle  he believed that if he succeeded in this design 
victory was assured  although he was informed that the florentines had
thirty thousand men  whilst he had only twelve thousand  although he
had every confidence in his own abilities and the valour of his troops 
yet he hesitated to attack his enemy in the open lest he should be
overwhelmed by numbers  serravalle is a castle between pescia and
pistoia  situated on a hill which blocks the val di nievole  not in the
exact pass  but about a bowshot beyond  the pass itself is in places
narrow and steep  whilst in general it ascends gently  but is still
narrow  especially at the summit where the waters divide  so that
twenty men side by side could hold it  the lord of serravalle was
manfred  a german  who  before castruccio became lord of pistoia  had
been allowed to remain in possession of the castle  it being common to
the lucchese and the pistoians  and unclaimed by either—neither of them
wishing to displace manfred as long as he kept his promise of
neutrality  and came under obligations to no one  for these reasons 
and also because the castle was well fortified  he had always been able
to maintain his position  it was here that castruccio had determined to
fall upon his enemy  for here his few men would have the advantage  and
there was no fear lest  seeing the large masses of the hostile force
before they became engaged  they should not stand  as soon as this
trouble with florence arose  castruccio saw the immense advantage which
possession of this castle would give him  and having an intimate
friendship with a resident in the castle  he managed matters so with
him that four hundred of his men were to be admitted into the castle
the night before the attack on the florentines  and the castellan put
to death 

castruccio  having prepared everything  had now to encourage the
florentines to persist in their desire to carry the seat of war away
from pistoia into the val di nievole  therefore he did not move his
army from montecarlo  thus the florentines hurried on until they
reached their encampment under serravalle  intending to cross the hill
on the following morning  in the meantime  castruccio had seized the
castle at night  had also moved his army from montecarlo  and marching
from thence at midnight in dead silence  had reached the foot of
serravalle  thus he and the florentines commenced the ascent of the
hill at the same time in the morning  castruccio sent forward his
infantry by the main road  and a troop of four hundred horsemen by a
path on the left towards the castle  the florentines sent forward four
hundred cavalry ahead of their army which was following  never
expecting to find castruccio in possession of the hill  nor were they
aware of his having seized the castle  thus it happened that the
florentine horsemen mounting the hill were completely taken by surprise
when they discovered the infantry of castruccio  and so close were they
upon it they had scarcely time to pull down their visors  it was a case
of unready soldiers being attacked by ready  and they were assailed
with such vigour that with difficulty they could hold their own 
although some few of them got through  when the noise of the fighting
reached the florentine camp below  it was filled with confusion  the
cavalry and infantry became inextricably mixed  the captains were
unable to get their men either backward or forward  owing to the
narrowness of the pass  and amid all this tumult no one knew what ought
to be done or what could be done  in a short time the cavalry who were
engaged with the enemy’s infantry were scattered or killed without
having made any effective defence because of their unfortunate
position  although in sheer desperation they had offered a stout
resistance  retreat had been impossible  with the mountains on both
flanks  whilst in front were their enemies  and in the rear their
friends  when castruccio saw that his men were unable to strike a
decisive blow at the enemy and put them to flight  he sent one thousand
infantrymen round by the castle  with orders to join the four hundred
horsemen he had previously dispatched there  and commanded the whole
force to fall upon the flank of the enemy  these orders they carried
out with such fury that the florentines could not sustain the attack 
but gave way  and were soon in full retreat—conquered more by their
unfortunate position than by the valour of their enemy  those in the
rear turned towards pistoia  and spread through the plains  each man
seeking only his own safety  the defeat was complete and very
sanguinary  many captains were taken prisoners  among whom were bandini
dei rossi  francesco brunelleschi  and giovanni della tosa  all
florentine noblemen  with many tuscans and neapolitans who fought on
the florentine side  having been sent by king ruberto to assist the
guelphs  immediately the pistoians heard of this defeat they drove out
the friends of the guelphs  and surrendered to castruccio  he was not
content with occupying prato and all the castles on the plains on both
sides of the arno  but marched his army into the plain of peretola 
about two miles from florence  here he remained many days  dividing the
spoils  and celebrating his victory with feasts and games  holding
horse races  and foot races for men and women  he also struck medals in
commemoration of the defeat of the florentines  he endeavoured to
corrupt some of the citizens of florence  who were to open the city
gates at night  but the conspiracy was discovered  and the
participators in it taken and beheaded  among whom were tommaso lupacci
and lambertuccio frescobaldi  this defeat caused the florentines great
anxiety  and despairing of preserving their liberty  they sent envoys
to king ruberto of naples  offering him the dominion of their city  and
he  knowing of what immense importance the maintenance of the guelph
cause was to him  accepted it  he agreed with the florentines to
receive from them a yearly tribute of two hundred thousand florins  and
he sent his son carlo to florence with four thousand horsemen 

shortly after this the florentines were relieved in some degree of the
pressure of castruccio’s army  owing to his being compelled to leave
his positions before florence and march on pisa  in order to suppress a
conspiracy that had been raised against him by benedetto lanfranchi 
one of the first men in pisa  who could not endure that his fatherland
should be under the dominion of the lucchese  he had formed this
conspiracy  intending to seize the citadel  kill the partisans of
castruccio  and drive out the garrison  as  however  in a conspiracy
paucity of numbers is essential to secrecy  so for its execution a few
are not sufficient  and in seeking more adherents to his conspiracy
lanfranchi encountered a person who revealed the design to castruccio 
this betrayal cannot be passed by without severe reproach to bonifacio
cerchi and giovanni guidi  two florentine exiles who were suffering
their banishment in pisa  thereupon castruccio seized benedetto and put
him to death  and beheaded many other noble citizens  and drove their
families into exile  it now appeared to castruccio that both pisa and
pistoia were thoroughly disaffected  he employed much thought and
energy upon securing his position there  and this gave the florentines
their opportunity to reorganize their army  and to await the coming of
carlo  the son of the king of naples  when carlo arrived they decided
to lose no more time  and assembled a great army of more than thirty
thousand infantry and ten thousand cavalry—having called to their aid
every guelph there was in italy  they consulted whether they should
attack pistoia or pisa first  and decided that it would be better to
march on the latter—a course  owing to the recent conspiracy  more
likely to succeed  and of more advantage to them  because they believed
that the surrender of pistoia would follow the acquisition of pisa 

in the early part of may 1328  the florentines put in motion this army
and quickly occupied lastra  signa  montelupo  and empoli  passing from
thence on to san miniato  when castruccio heard of the enormous army
which the florentines were sending against him  he was in no degree
alarmed  believing that the time had now arrived when fortune would
deliver the empire of tuscany into his hands  for he had no reason to
think that his enemy would make a better fight  or had better prospects
of success  than at pisa or serravalle  he assembled twenty thousand
foot soldiers and four thousand horsemen  and with this army went to
fucecchio  whilst he sent pagolo guinigi to pisa with five thousand
infantry  fucecchio has a stronger position than any other town in the
pisan district  owing to its situation between the rivers arno and
gusciana and its slight elevation above the surrounding plain 
moreover  the enemy could not hinder its being victualled unless they
divided their forces  nor could they approach it either from the
direction of lucca or pisa  nor could they get through to pisa  or
attack castruccio’s forces except at a disadvantage  in one case they
would find themselves placed between his two armies  the one under his
own command and the other under pagolo  and in the other case they
would have to cross the arno to get to close quarters with the enemy 
an undertaking of great hazard  in order to tempt the florentines to
take this latter course  castruccio withdrew his men from the banks of
the river and placed them under the walls of fucecchio  leaving a wide
expanse of land between them and the river 

the florentines  having occupied san miniato  held a council of war to
decide whether they should attack pisa or the army of castruccio  and 
having weighed the difficulties of both courses  they decided upon the
latter  the river arno was at that time low enough to be fordable  yet
the water reached to the shoulders of the infantrymen and to the
saddles of the horsemen  on the morning of 10 june 1328  the
florentines commenced the battle by ordering forward a number of
cavalry and ten thousand infantry  castruccio  whose plan of action was
fixed  and who well knew what to do  at once attacked the florentines
with five thousand infantry and three thousand horsemen  not allowing
them to issue from the river before he charged them  he also sent one
thousand light infantry up the river bank  and the same number down the
arno  the infantry of the florentines were so much impeded by their
arms and the water that they were not able to mount the banks of the
river  whilst the cavalry had made the passage of the river more
difficult for the others  by reason of the few who had crossed having
broken up the bed of the river  and this being deep with mud  many of
the horses rolled over with their riders and many of them had stuck so
fast that they could not move  when the florentine captains saw the
difficulties their men were meeting  they withdrew them and moved
higher up the river  hoping to find the river bed less treacherous and
the banks more adapted for landing  these men were met at the bank by
the forces which castruccio had already sent forward  who  being light
armed with bucklers and javelins in their hands  let fly with
tremendous shouts into the faces and bodies of the cavalry  the horses 
alarmed by the noise and the wounds  would not move forward  and
trampled each other in great confusion  the fight between the men of
castruccio and those of the enemy who succeeded in crossing was sharp
and terrible  both sides fought with the utmost desperation and neither
would yield  the soldiers of castruccio fought to drive the others back
into the river  whilst the florentines strove to get a footing on land
in order to make room for the others pressing forward  who if they
could but get out of the water would be able to fight  and in this
obstinate conflict they were urged on by their captains  castruccio
shouted to his men that these were the same enemies whom they had
before conquered at serravalle  whilst the florentines reproached each
other that the many should be overcome by the few  at length
castruccio  seeing how long the battle had lasted  and that both his
men and the enemy were utterly exhausted  and that both sides had many
killed and wounded  pushed forward another body of infantry to take up
a position at the rear of those who were fighting  he then commanded
these latter to open their ranks as if they intended to retreat  and
one part of them to turn to the right and another to the left  this
cleared a space of which the florentines at once took advantage  and
thus gained possession of a portion of the battlefield  but when these
tired soldiers found themselves at close quarters with castruccio’s
reserves they could not stand against them and at once fell back into
the river  the cavalry of either side had not as yet gained any
decisive advantage over the other  because castruccio  knowing his
inferiority in this arm  had commanded his leaders only to stand on the
defensive against the attacks of their adversaries  as he hoped that
when he had overcome the infantry he would be able to make short work
of the cavalry  this fell out as he had hoped  for when he saw the
florentine army driven back across the river he ordered the remainder
of his infantry to attack the cavalry of the enemy  this they did with
lance and javelin  and  joined by their own cavalry  fell upon the
enemy with the greatest fury and soon put him to flight  the florentine
captains  having seen the difficulty their cavalry had met with in
crossing the river  had attempted to make their infantry cross lower
down the river  in order to attack the flanks of castruccio’s army  but
here  also  the banks were steep and already lined by the men of
castruccio  and this movement was quite useless  thus the florentines
were so completely defeated at all points that scarcely a third of them
escaped  and castruccio was again covered with glory  many captains
were taken prisoners  and carlo  the son of king ruberto  with
michelagnolo falconi and taddeo degli albizzi  the florentine
commissioners  fled to empoli  if the spoils were great  the slaughter
was infinitely greater  as might be expected in such a battle  of the
florentines there fell twenty thousand two hundred and thirty one men 
whilst castruccio lost one thousand five hundred and seventy men 

but fortune growing envious of the glory of castruccio took away his
life just at the time when she should have preserved it  and thus
ruined all those plans which for so long a time he had worked to carry
into effect  and in the successful prosecution of which nothing but
death could have stopped him  castruccio was in the thick of the battle
the whole of the day  and when the end of it came  although fatigued
and overheated  he stood at the gate of fucecchio to welcome his men on
their return from victory and personally thank them  he was also on the
watch for any attempt of the enemy to retrieve the fortunes of the day 
he being of the opinion that it was the duty of a good general to be
the first man in the saddle and the last out of it  here castruccio
stood exposed to a wind which often rises at midday on the banks of the
arno  and which is often very unhealthy  from this he took a chill  of
which he thought nothing  as he was accustomed to such troubles  but it
was the cause of his death  on the following night he was attacked with
high fever  which increased so rapidly that the doctors saw it must
prove fatal  castruccio  therefore  called pagolo guinigi to him  and
addressed him as follows 

“if i could have believed that fortune would have cut me off in the
midst of the career which was leading to that glory which all my
successes promised  i should have laboured less  and i should have left
thee  if a smaller state  at least with fewer enemies and perils 
because i should have been content with the governorships of lucca and
pisa  i should neither have subjugated the pistoians  nor outraged the
florentines with so many injuries  but i would have made both these
peoples my friends  and i should have lived  if no longer  at least
more peacefully  and have left you a state without a doubt smaller  but
one more secure and established on a surer foundation  but fortune  who
insists upon having the arbitrament of human affairs  did not endow me
with sufficient judgment to recognize this from the first  nor the time
to surmount it  thou hast heard  for many have told thee  and i have
never concealed it  how i entered the house of thy father whilst yet a
boy—a stranger to all those ambitions which every generous soul should
feel—and how i was brought up by him  and loved as though i had been
born of his blood  how under his governance i learned to be valiant and
capable of availing myself of all that fortune  of which thou hast been
witness  when thy good father came to die  he committed thee and all
his possessions to my care  and i have brought thee up with that love 
and increased thy estate with that care  which i was bound to show  and
in order that thou shouldst not only possess the estate which thy
father left  but also that which my fortune and abilities have gained 
i have never married  so that the love of children should never deflect
my mind from that gratitude which i owed to the children of thy father 
thus i leave thee a vast estate  of which i am well content  but i am
deeply concerned  inasmuch as i leave it thee unsettled and insecure 
thou hast the city of lucca on thy hands  which will never rest
contented under thy government  thou hast also pisa  where the men are
of nature changeable and unreliable  who  although they may be
sometimes held in subjection  yet they will ever disdain to serve under
a lucchese  pistoia is also disloyal to thee  she being eaten up with
factions and deeply incensed against thy family by reason of the wrongs
recently inflicted upon them  thou hast for neighbours the offended
florentines  injured by us in a thousand ways  but not utterly
destroyed  who will hail the news of my death with more delight than
they would the acquisition of all tuscany  in the emperor and in the
princes of milan thou canst place no reliance  for they are far
distant  slow  and their help is very long in coming  therefore  thou
hast no hope in anything but in thine own abilities  and in the memory
of my valour  and in the prestige which this latest victory has brought
thee  which  as thou knowest how to use it with prudence  will assist
thee to come to terms with the florentines  who  as they are suffering
under this great defeat  should be inclined to listen to thee  and
whereas i have sought to make them my enemies  because i believed that
war with them would conduce to my power and glory  thou hast every
inducement to make friends of them  because their alliance will bring
thee advantages and security  it is of the greatest important in this
world that a man should know himself  and the measure of his own
strength and means  and he who knows that he has not a genius for
fighting must learn how to govern by the arts of peace  and it will be
well for thee to rule thy conduct by my counsel  and to learn in this
way to enjoy what my life work and dangers have gained  and in this
thou wilt easily succeed when thou hast learnt to believe that what i
have told thee is true  and thou wilt be doubly indebted to me  in that
i have left thee this realm and have taught thee how to keep it ”

after this there came to castruccio those citizens of pisa  pistoia 
and lucca  who had been fighting at his side  and whilst recommending
pagolo to them  and making them swear obedience to him as his
successor  he died  he left a happy memory to those who had known him 
and no prince of those times was ever loved with such devotion as he
was  his obsequies were celebrated with every sign of mourning  and he
was buried in san francesco at lucca  fortune was not so friendly to
pagolo guinigi as she had been to castruccio  for he had not the
abilities  not long after the death of castruccio  pagolo lost pisa 
and then pistoia  and only with difficulty held on to lucca  this
latter city continued in the family of guinigi until the time of the
great grandson of pagolo 

from what has been related here it will be seen that castruccio was a
man of exceptional abilities  not only measured by men of his own time 
but also by those of an earlier date  in stature he was above the
ordinary height  and perfectly proportioned  he was of a gracious
presence  and he welcomed men with such urbanity that those who spoke
with him rarely left him displeased  his hair was inclined to be red 
and he wore it cut short above the ears  and  whether it rained or
snowed  he always went without a hat  he was delightful among friends 
but terrible to his enemies  just to his subjects  ready to play false
with the unfaithful  and willing to overcome by fraud those whom he
desired to subdue  because he was wont to say that it was the victory
that brought the glory  not the methods of achieving it  no one was
bolder in facing danger  none more prudent in extricating himself  he
was accustomed to say that men ought to attempt everything and fear
nothing  that god is a lover of strong men  because one always sees
that the weak are chastised by the strong  he was also wonderfully
sharp or biting though courteous in his answers  and as he did not look
for any indulgence in this way of speaking from others  so he was not
angered with others did not show it to him  it has often happened that
he has listened quietly when others have spoken sharply to him  as on
the following occasions  he had caused a ducat to be given for a
partridge  and was taken to task for doing so by a friend  to whom
castruccio had said  “you would not have given more than a penny ”
“that is true ” answered the friend  then said castruccio to him  “a
ducat is much less to me ” having about him a flatterer on whom he had
spat to show that he scorned him  the flatterer said to him  “fisherman
are willing to let the waters of the sea saturate them in order that
they may take a few little fishes  and i allow myself to be wetted by
spittle that i may catch a whale”  and this was not only heard by
castruccio with patience but rewarded  when told by a priest that it
was wicked for him to live so sumptuously  castruccio said  “if that be
a vice then you should not fare so splendidly at the feasts of our
saints ” passing through a street he saw a young man as he came out of
a house of ill fame blush at being seen by castruccio  and said to him 
“thou shouldst not be ashamed when thou comest out  but when thou goest
into such places ” a friend gave him a very curiously tied knot to undo
and was told  “fool  do you think that i wish to untie a thing which
gave so much trouble to fasten ” castruccio said to one who professed
to be a philosopher  “you are like the dogs who always run after those
who will give them the best to eat ” and was answered  “we are rather
like the doctors who go to the houses of those who have the greatest
need of them ” going by water from pisa to leghorn  castruccio was much
disturbed by a dangerous storm that sprang up  and was reproached for
cowardice by one of those with him  who said that he did not fear
anything  castruccio answered that he did not wonder at that  since
every man valued his soul for what is was worth  being asked by one
what he ought to do to gain estimation  he said  “when thou goest to a
banquet take care that thou dost not seat one piece of wood upon
another ” to a person who was boasting that he had read many things 
castruccio said  “he knows better than to boast of remembering many
things ” someone bragged that he could drink much without becoming
intoxicated  castruccio replied  “an ox does the same ” castruccio was
acquainted with a girl with whom he had intimate relations  and being
blamed by a friend who told him that it was undignified for him to be
taken in by a woman  he said  “she has not taken me in  i have taken
her ” being also blamed for eating very dainty foods  he answered 
“thou dost not spend as much as i do?” and being told that it was true 
he continued  “then thou art more avaricious than i am gluttonous ”
being invited by taddeo bernardi  a very rich and splendid citizen of
luca  to supper  he went to the house and was shown by taddeo into a
chamber hung with silk and paved with fine stones representing flowers
and foliage of the most beautiful colouring  castruccio gathered some
saliva in his mouth and spat it out upon taddeo  and seeing him much
disturbed by this  said to him  “i knew not where to spit in order to
offend thee less ” being asked how caesar died he said  “god willing i
will die as he did ” being one night in the house of one of his
gentlemen where many ladies were assembled  he was reproved by one of
his friends for dancing and amusing himself with them more than was
usual in one of his station  so he said  “he who is considered wise by
day will not be considered a fool at night ” a person came to demand a
favour of castruccio  and thinking he was not listening to his plea
threw himself on his knees to the ground  and being sharply reproved by
castruccio  said  “thou art the reason of my acting thus for thou hast
thy ears in thy feet ” whereupon he obtained double the favour he had
asked  castruccio used to say that the way to hell was an easy one 
seeing that it was in a downward direction and you travelled
blindfolded  being asked a favour by one who used many superfluous
words  he said to him  “when you have another request to make  send
someone else to make it ” having been wearied by a similar man with a
long oration who wound up by saying  “perhaps i have fatigued you by
speaking so long ” castruccio said  “you have not  because i have not
listened to a word you said ” he used to say of one who had been a
beautiful child and who afterwards became a fine man  that he was
dangerous  because he first took the husbands from the wives and now he
took the wives from their husbands  to an envious man who laughed  he
said  “do you laugh because you are successful or because another is
unfortunate?” whilst he was still in the charge of messer francesco
guinigi  one of his companions said to him  “what shall i give you if
you will let me give you a blow on the nose?” castruccio answered  “a
helmet ” having put to death a citizen of lucca who had been
instrumental in raising him to power  and being told that he had done
wrong to kill one of his old friends  he answered that people deceived
themselves  he had only killed a new enemy  castruccio praised greatly
those men who intended to take a wife and then did not do so  saying
that they were like men who said they would go to sea  and then refused
when the time came  he said that it always struck him with surprise
that whilst men in buying an earthen or glass vase would sound it first
to learn if it were good  yet in choosing a wife they were content with
only looking at her  he was once asked in what manner he would wish to
be buried when he died  and answered  “with the face turned downwards 
for i know when i am gone this country will be turned upside down ” on
being asked if it had ever occurred to him to become a friar in order
to save his soul  he answered that it had not  because it appeared
strange to him that fra lazerone should go to paradise and uguccione
della faggiuola to the inferno  he was once asked when should a man eat
to preserve his health  and replied  “if the man be rich let him eat
when he is hungry  if he be poor  then when he can ” seeing one of his
gentlemen make a member of his family lace him up  he said to him  “i
pray god that you will let him feed you also ” seeing that someone had
written upon his house in latin the words  “may god preserve this house
from the wicked ” he said  “the owner must never go in ” passing
through one of the streets he saw a small house with a very large door 
and remarked  “that house will fly through the door ” he was having a
discussion with the ambassador of the king of naples concerning the
property of some banished nobles  when a dispute arose between them 
and the ambassador asked him if he had no fear of the king  “is this
king of yours a bad man or a good one?” asked castruccio  and was told
that he was a good one  whereupon he said  “why should you suggest that
i should be afraid of a good man?”

i could recount many other stories of his sayings both witty and
weighty  but i think that the above will be sufficient testimony to his
high qualities  he lived forty four years  and was in every way a
prince  and as he was surrounded by many evidences of his good fortune 
so he also desired to have near him some memorials of his bad fortune 
therefore the manacles with which he was chained in prison are to be
seen to this day fixed up in the tower of his residence  where they
were placed by him to testify forever to his days of adversity  as in
his life he was inferior neither to philip of macedon  the father of
alexander  nor to scipio of rome  so he died in the same year of his
age as they did  and he would doubtless have excelled both of them had
fortune decreed that he should be born  not in lucca  but in macedonia
or rome 





        
                end of the project gutenberg ebook the prince    
        

    

updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed 


creating the works from print editions not protected by u s  copyright
law means that no one owns a united states copyright in these works 
so the foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united
states without permission and without paying copyright
royalties  special rules  set forth in the general terms of use part
of this license  apply to copying and distributing project
gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the project gutenberg™
concept and trademark  project gutenberg is a registered trademark 
and may not be used if you charge for an ebook  except by following
the terms of the trademark license  including paying royalties for use
of the project gutenberg trademark  if you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook  complying with the trademark license is very
easy  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works  reports  performances and research  project
gutenberg ebooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically anything in the united states with ebooks not protected
by u s  copyright law  redistribution is subject to the trademark
license  especially commercial redistribution 


start  full license
the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work


to protect the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works  by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “project
gutenberg”)  you agree to comply with all the terms of the full
project gutenberg™ license available with this file or online at
www gutenberg org/license 


section 1  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg™ electronic works


1 a  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg™
electronic work  you indicate that you have read  understand  agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement  you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession  if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
project gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement  you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1 e 8 


1 b  “project gutenberg” is a registered trademark  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement  see
paragraph 1 c below  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg™
electronic works  see paragraph 1 e below 


1 c  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation (“the
foundation” or pglaf)  owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of project gutenberg™ electronic works  nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the united
states  if an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
united states and you are located in the united states  we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying  distributing  performing 
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to project gutenberg are removed  of course  we hope
that you will support the project gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing project gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
project gutenberg™ name associated with the work  you can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full project gutenberg™ license when
you share it without charge with others 



1 d  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work  copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change  if you are outside the united states 
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading  copying  displaying  performing 
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other project gutenberg™ work  the foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the united states 


1 e  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg 


1 e 1  the following sentence  with active links to  or other
immediate access to  the full project gutenberg™ license must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a project gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “project gutenberg” appears  or with which the
phrase “project gutenberg” is associated) is accessed  displayed 
performed  viewed  copied or distributed 


  
    this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the united states and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever  you may copy it  give it away or re use it under the terms
    of the project gutenberg license included with this ebook or online
    at www gutenberg org  if you
    are not located in the united states  you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this ebook 
  


1 e 2  if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by u s  copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder)  the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the united states without paying any fees or charges  if you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “project
gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work  you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the project gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 


1 e 3  if an individual project gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder  your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder  additional terms
will be linked to the project gutenberg™ license for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work 


1 e 4  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg™
license terms from this work  or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg™ 


1 e 5  do not copy  display  perform  distribute or redistribute this
electronic work  or any part of this electronic work  without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1 e 1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg™ license 


1 e 6  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary 
compressed  marked up  nonproprietary or proprietary form  including
any word processing or hypertext form  however  if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a project gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “plain vanilla ascii” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official project gutenberg™ website
(www gutenberg org)  you must  at no additional cost  fee or expense
to the user  provide a copy  a means of exporting a copy  or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request  of the work in its original “plain
vanilla ascii” or other form  any alternate format must include the
full project gutenberg™ license as specified in paragraph 1 e 1 


1 e 7  do not charge a fee for access to  viewing  displaying 
performing  copying or distributing any project gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 


1 e 8  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that 


    • you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of project gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes  the fee is owed
        to the owner of the project gutenberg™ trademark  but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation  royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns  royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the project
        gutenberg literary archive foundation at the address specified in
        section 4  “information about donations to the project gutenberg
        literary archive foundation ”
    
    • you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg™
        license  you must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of project gutenberg™
        works 
    
    • you provide  in accordance with paragraph 1 f 3  a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy  if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work 
    
    • you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of project gutenberg™ works 
    


1 e 9  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project
gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement  you must obtain permission in writing
from the project gutenberg literary archive foundation  the manager of
the project gutenberg™ trademark  contact the foundation as set
forth in section 3 below 


1 f 


1 f 1  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify  do copyright research on  transcribe and proofread
works not protected by u s  copyright law in creating the project
gutenberg™ collection  despite these efforts  project gutenberg™
electronic works  and the medium on which they may be stored  may
contain “defects ” such as  but not limited to  incomplete  inaccurate
or corrupt data  transcription errors  a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement  a defective or damaged disk or
other medium  a computer virus  or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment 


1 f 2  limited warranty  disclaimer of damages   except for the “right
of replacement or refund” described in paragraph 1 f 3  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation  the owner of the project
gutenberg™ trademark  and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement  disclaim all
liability to you for damages  costs and expenses  including legal
fees  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence  strict
liability  breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1 f 3  you agree that the foundation  the
trademark owner  and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual  direct  indirect  consequential  punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage 


1 f 3  limited right of replacement or refund   if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it  you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from  if you
received the work on a physical medium  you must return the medium
with your written explanation  the person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund  if you received the work electronically  the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund  if
the second copy is also defective  you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem 


1 f 4  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1 f 3  this work is provided to you ‘as is’  with no
other warranties of any kind  express or implied  including but not
limited to warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose 


1 f 5  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages  if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement  the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law  the invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions 


1 f 6  indemnity   you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation  the
trademark owner  any agent or employee of the foundation  anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement  and any volunteers associated with the
production  promotion and distribution of project gutenberg™
electronic works  harmless from all liability  costs and expenses 
including legal fees  that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur  (a) distribution of this
or any project gutenberg™ work  (b) alteration  modification  or
additions or deletions to any project gutenberg™ work  and (c) any
defect you cause 


section 2  information about the mission of project gutenberg™


project gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete  old  middle aged and new computers  it
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life 


volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come  in 2001  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg™ and future
generations  to learn more about the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation and how your efforts and donations can help  see
sections 3 and 4 and the foundation information page at www gutenberg org 


section 3  information about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation


the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service  the foundation’s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64 6221541  contributions to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
u s  federal laws and your state’s laws 


the foundation’s business office is located at 809 north 1500 west 
salt lake city  ut 84116  (801) 596 1887  email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the foundation’s website
and official page at www gutenberg org/contact


section 4  information about donations to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation


project gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment  many small donations
($1 to $5 000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs 


the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort  much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance  to send
donations or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www gutenberg org/donate 


while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements  we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate 


international donations are gratefully accepted  but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states  u s  laws alone swamp our small staff 


please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks  online payments and credit card donations  to
donate  please visit  www gutenberg org/donate 


section 5  general information about project gutenberg™ electronic works


professor michael s  hart was the originator of the project
gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone  for forty years  he produced and
distributed project gutenberg™ ebooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support 


project gutenberg™ ebooks are often created from several printed
editions  all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the u s  unless a copyright notice is included  thus  we do not
necessarily keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition 


most people start at our website which has the main pg search
facility  www gutenberg org 


this website includes information about project gutenberg™ 
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation  how to help produce our new ebooks  and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks 


